Resolution A.918(22) 
Adopted on 29 November 2001  (Agenda item 9) 
IMO STANDARD MARINE COMMUNICATION PHRASES
 
 
 
I:\ASSEMBLY\22 \RES\918.doc For reasons of economy, this document is printed in a limited number.  Delegates are 
kindly asked to bring their copies to meetin gs and not to request additional copies.   
INTERNATIONAL MARITIME ORGANIZATION 
  
 
IMO  
E 
 
  
ASSEMBLY 
22nd  session  
Agenda item 9  
A 22/Res.918  
 25 January 2002  
  Original:  ENGLISH  
 
Resolution A.918(22) 
 
Adopted on 29 November 2001 
(Agenda item 9) 
 
 
IMO STANDARD MARINE COMMUNICATION PHRASES  
 
 
THE ASSEMBLY,  
 
 RECALLING Article 15(j) of the Convention on the International Maritime Organization 
concerning the functions of the Assembly in relation to regulations and guidelines concerning 
maritime safety,  
 
 RECALLING ALSO resolution A.380(X) by which it adopted the Standard Marine 
Navigational Vocabulary,  
 
 RECALLING FURTHER the provisions of regulation V/14.4 of the International 
Convention for the Safety of Life at Sea, 1974, requiring that on all ships to which chapter I 
thereof applies, English shall be used on the bridge as the working language for bridge -to-bridge 
and bridge -to-shore safety communications as well as for communications on board between the 
pilot and bridge watchkeeping personnel unless those directly involved in the communications 
speak a common language other than English,  
 
 RECOGNIZING that the standardization of language and terminology used in such 
communications would assist the safe operation of ships and contribute to greater safety of 
navigation,  
 
RECOGNIZING ALSO the wide use of the English language for international 
navigational communications and the need to assist maritime training institutions to meet the 
objectives of safe operations of ships and enhanced navigational safety th rough, inter alia, the 
standardization of language and terminology used, 
 
 HAVING CONSIDERED the recommendations of the Maritime Safety Committee at its 
sixty-eighth and seventy -fourth sessions,  
 
1. ADOPTS the IMO Standard Marine Communication Phrases set out in Annex  1 to the 
present resolution; 
 
 
Resolution A.918(22) 
Adopted on 29 November 2001  (Agenda item 9) 
IMO STANDARD MARINE COMMUNICATION PHRASES
A 22/Res.918  - 2 - 
 
 
I:\ASSEMBLY\22 \RES\918.doc  
2. AUTHORIZES the Maritime Safety Committee to keep the IMO Standard Marine 
Communication Phrases under review and to amend them when necessary in accordance with the 
procedure set out in Annex 2 to the present resolution;  
 
3. RECOMMENDS Governments to give the IMO Standard Marine Communication 
Phrases a wide circulation to all prospective users and all maritime education authorities, in order 
to support compliance with the standards of competence as required by  table A -II/1 of the 
STCW Code; 
 
4. REVOKES resolution A.380(X). 
 
 
 
 
Resolution A.918(22) 
Adopted on 29 November 2001  (Agenda item 9) 
IMO STANDARD MARINE COMMUNICATION PHRASES
 - 3 - A 22/Res.918 
 
 
I:\ASSEMBLY\22 \RES\918.doc ANNEX 1 
 
 
FOREWORD 
 
As navigational and safety communications from ship to shore and vice versa, from ship to ship, 
and on board ship must be precise, simple and unambiguous so as to avo id confusion and error, 
there is a need to standardize the language used.  This is of particular importance in the light of 
the increasing number of internationally trading vessels with crews speaking many different 
languages, since problems of communicati on may cause misunderstandings leading to dangers to 
the vessel, the people on board and the environment. 
 
In 1973, the Maritime Safety Committee agreed, at its twenty -seventh session that where 
language difficulties arise a common language should be used for navigational purposes, and that 
language should be English. In consequence the Standard Marine Navigational Vocabulary 
(SMNV) was developed, adopted in 1977 and amended in 1985. 
 
In 1992, the Maritime Safety Committee, at its sixtieth session, instruct ed the Sub -Committee 
on Safety of Navigation to develop a more comprehensive standardized safety language than 
SMNV 1985, taking into account the changing conditions in modern seafaring and covering all 
major safety -related verbal communications. 
 
At its s ixty-eighth session in 1997, the Maritime Safety Committee adopted the Draft IMO 
Standard Marine Communication Phrases (SMCP) developed by the Sub -Committee on Safety of 
Navigation.  The draft IMO SMCP, following international trials, was amended at the fo rty-sixth 
session of this Sub -Committee, and was given final consideration by the Maritime Safety 
Committee at its seventy -fourth session in the light of remarks received by the Organization.  The 
IMO SMCP was adopted by the Assembly in November 2001 as resolution  A.918(22). 
 
Under the International Convention on Standards of Training, Certification and Watchkeeping 
for Seafarers, 1978, as revised 1995, the ability to use and understand the IMO SMCP is required 
for the certification of officers in charge of  a navigational watch on ships of 500 gross tonnage or 
more. 
 
 
Resolution A.918(22) 
Adopted on 29 November 2001  (Agenda item 9) 
IMO STANDARD MARINE COMMUNICATION PHRASES
A 22/Res.918  - 4 - 
 
 
I:\ASSEMBLY\22 \RES\918.doc  
 
IMO STANDARD MARINE COMMUNICATION PHRASES 
 
CONTENTS 
 
 
DESCRIPTION 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
1 Position of the IMO SMCP in maritime practice  
2 Organization of the IMO SMCP 
3 Position of the IMO SMCP in Mariti me Education and Training  
4 Basic communicative features 
5 Typographical conventions  
 
 
GENERAL 
 
 1  Procedure  
 2  Spelling  
 3  Message markers  
 4  Responses 
 5  Distress / urgency / safety signals  
 6  Standard organizational phrases  
 7  Corrections   
 8  Readiness   
 9  Repetition  
10  Numbers  
11  Positions  
12  Bearings  
13  Courses   
14  Distances   
15  Speed  
16  Time  
17  Geographical names 
18  Ambiguous words  
 
 
GLOSSARY  
 
1  General terms  
2         VTS special terms  
 
 
Resolution A.918(22) 
Adopted on 29 November 2001  (Agenda item 9) 
IMO STANDARD MARINE COMMUNICATION PHRASES
 - 5 - A 22/Res.918 
 
 
I:\ASSEMBLY\22 \RES\918.doc  
IMO STANDARD MARINE COMMUNICATION PHRASES: PART A 
 
A1 EXTERNAL COMMUNICATION PHRASES 
 
A1/1  Distress traffic  
 
A1/1.1  Distress communications  
 
.1  Fire, explosion  
.2  Flooding  
.3  Collision  
.4  Grounding  
.5  List, danger of capsizing  
.6  Sinking  
.7  Disabled and adrift  
.8  Armed attack / piracy  
.9  Undesignated distress  
.10 Abandoning vessel  
.11 Person overboard 
 
A1/1.2  Search and Rescue communications  
 
.1  SAR communications  (specifying or supplementary to A1/1.1)  
.2  Acknowledgement and / or relay of SAR messages  
.3  Performing / co-ordinating SA R operations  
.4  Finishing with SAR operations  
 
A1/1.3  Requesting Medical Assistance  
 
A1/2  Urgency traffic  
 Safety of a vessel  (other than distress)  
 
.1 Technical failure  
.2 Cargo 
.3 Ice damage  
 
A1/3  Safety Communications  
 
A1/3.1  Meteorological and hydro logical conditions  
 
.1 Winds, storms, tropical storms; sea state  
.2 Restricted visibility  
.3 Ice 
.4 Abnormal tides 
 
A1/3.2  Navigational warnings involving  
 
.1 Land - or seamarks  
.2 Drifting objects  
.3 Electronic navigational aids  
.4 Seabottom characteristic s, wrecks  
Resolution A.918(22) 
Adopted on 29 November 2001  (Agenda item 9) 
IMO STANDARD MARINE COMMUNICATION PHRASES
A 22/Res.918  - 6 - 
 
 
I:\ASSEMBLY\22 \RES\918.doc .5 Miscellaneous  
.5.1  Cable, pipe and seismic / hydrographic operations  
.5.2  Diving operations, tows, dredging operations  
.5.3  Tanker transhipment 
.5.4  Off-shore installations, rig moves  
.5.5  Defective locks or bridges  
.5.6  Military operat ions 
.5.7  Fishery 
 
A1/3.3  Environmental protection communications  
 
A1/4  Pilotage  
 
A1/4.1  Pilot request  
 
A1/4.2  Embarking / disembarking pilot 
A1/4.3  Tug request  
 
A1/5  Specials  
 
A1/5.1  Helicopter operations  
 
A1/5.2  Ice-breaker operations  
.1 Ice-breaker req uest 
.2 Ice-breaker assistance for convoy  
.3 Ice-breaker assistance in close -coupled towing    
 
A1/6  Vessel Traffic Service (VTS) Standard Phrases  
 
A1/6.1  Phrases for acquiring and providing  data for a traffic image  
.1 Acquiring and providing routine traff ic data  
.2 Acquiring and providing distress traffic data  
 
A1/6.2  Phrases for providing VTS services  
.1 Information service  
.1.1  Navigational warnings  
.1.2  Navigational information  
.1.3  Traffic information  
.1.4  Route information  
.1.5  Hydrographic information  
.1.6  Electronic navigational aids information  
.1.7  Meteorological warnings  
.1.8  Meteorological information  
.1.9  Meteorological questions and answers  
.2 Navigational assistance service  
.2.1  Request  and identification  
.2.2  Position  
.2.3  Course 
.3 Traffic organization service  
.3.1  Clearance, forward planning  
.3.2  Anchoring  
.3.3  Arrival, berthing and departure  
.3.4  Enforcement 
 
Resolution A.918(22) 
Adopted on 29 November 2001  (Agenda item 9) 
IMO STANDARD MARINE COMMUNICATION PHRASES
 - 7 - A 22/Res.918 
 
 
I:\ASSEMBLY\22 \RES\918.doc .3.5  Avoiding dangerous situations, providing safe movements  
.3.6  Canal and lock operations  
 
A1/6.3  Handing over to another VTS 
 
A1/6.4  Phrases for communication with emergency services and allied services  
.1 Emergency services (SAR, fire fighting, pollution fighting)  
.2 Tug services  
.3 Pilot request  
.4 Embarking / disembarking pilot 
 
 
Appendix to A1 – External Commun ication Phrases  
Standard GMDSS Messages  
 
1 Standard Distress Message  
.1 Structure  
.2 Example  
 
2 Standard Urgency Message  
.1 Structure  
.2 Example  
 
3 Standard Safety Message  
.1 Structure  
.2 Example  
 
A2  ON-BOARD COMMUNICATION PHRASES 
 
A2/1  Standard Wheel Orders  
 
A2/2  Standard Engine Orders  
 
A2/3  Pilot on the Bridge  
 
A2/3.1       Propulsion system  
A2/3.2       Manoeuvring  
A2/3.3       Radar  
A2/3.4       Draft and air draft  
A2/3.5       Anchoring   
.1  Going to anchor  
.2  Leaving the anchorage  
A2/3.6   Tug assist ance  
A2/3.7   Berthing and unberthing  
.1  General 
.2  Berthing  
.3  Unberthing  
 
Resolution A.918(22) 
Adopted on 29 November 2001  (Agenda item 9) 
IMO STANDARD MARINE COMMUNICATION PHRASES
A 22/Res.918  - 8 - 
 
 
I:\ASSEMBLY\22 \RES\918.doc  
IMO STANDARD MARINE COMMUNICATION PHRASES:  PART B  
 
B ON-BOARD  COMMUNICATION  PHRASES 
 
B1 Operative ship handling  
 
B1/1 Handing over the watch  
 
B1/1.1  Briefing on position, m ovement and draft  
 .1 Position  
 .2 Movements  
 .3 Draft  
B1/1.2   Briefing on traffic situation in the area  
B1/1.3   Briefing on navigational aids and equipment status  
B1/1.4   Briefing on radiocommunications  
B1/1.5   Briefing on meteorological conditions  
B1/1.6   Briefing on standing orders and bridge organization  
B1/1.7   Briefing on special navigational events  
B1/1.8   Briefing on temperatures, pressures and soundings  
B1/1.9   Briefing on operation of main engine and auxiliary equipment 
B1/1.10  Briefing on pumping of fuel, ballast water, etc. 
B1/1.11  Briefing on special machinery events and repairs  
B1/1.12  Briefing on record keeping  
B1/1.13  Handing and taking over the watch  
 
B1/2  Trim, list and stability   
 
B2   Safety on board  
 
B2/1 General activities 
 
B2/1.1 Raising alarm 
B2/1.2 Briefing crew and passengers  
B2/1.3 Checking status of escape routes  
B2/1.4 Checking status of lifeboats / liferafts  
B2/1.5 Ordering evacuation  
B2/1.6 Roll call 
B2/1.7 Ordering abandon vessel  
B2/1.8 In-boat procedures 
 
B2/2 Occupational Safety  
 
B2/2.1 Instruction  
B2/2.2 Practical occupational safety  
B2/2.3 Occupational accidents  
 
B2/3 Fire protection and fire fighting  
 
Resolution A.918(22) 
Adopted on 29 November 2001  (Agenda item 9) 
IMO STANDARD MARINE COMMUNICATION PHRASES
 - 9 - A 22/Res.918 
 
 
I:\ASSEMBLY\22 \RES\918.doc B2/3.1 Fire protection  
 .1 Checking status of equipment 
 
B2/3.2 Fire fighting and drills  
.1 Reporting fire  
.2 Reporting readiness for action  
.3 Orders for fire fighting  
.4 Cancellation of alarm 
 
B2/4 Damage control  
 
B2/4.1 Checking equipment status and drills  
 
B2/4.2 Damage control activities 
.1 Reporting flooding  
.2 Reporting readiness for action  
.3 Orders for da mage control  
.4 Cancellation of alarm 
 
B2/5 Grounding  
 
B2/5.1 Reporting grounding and ordering actions  
B2/5.2 Reporting damage  
B2/5.3 Orders for refloating  
B2/5.4 Checking seaworthiness  
 
B2/6 Search and Rescue on -board Activities 
 
B2/6.1 Checking equipment status  
B2/6.2 Person -overboard activities 
B2/6.3 Rescue operation - reporting readiness for assistance  
B2/6.4 Conducting search  
B2/6.5 Rescue activities  
B2/6.6 Finishing with search and rescue operations  
 
B3   Cargo and cargo handling  
 
B3/1 Cargo handling 
 
B3/1.1 Loading and unloading  
.1 Loading capacities and quantities  
.2 Dockside/shipboard cargo handling gear and equipment 
.3 Preparing for loading / unloading  
.4 Operating cargo handling equipment and hatches 
.5 Maintaining/repairing cargo handling equipment 
.6 Briefing on stowing and securing  
 
B3/1.2 Handling dangerous goods  
.1 Briefing on nature of dangerous goods  
.2 Instructions on compatibility and stowage  
.3 Reporting incidents  
.4 Action in case of incidents  
 
Resolution A.918(22) 
Adopted on 29 November 2001  (Agenda item 9) 
IMO STANDARD MARINE COMMUNICATION PHRASES
A 22/Res.918  - 10 - 
 
 
I:\ASSEMBLY\22 \RES\918.doc B3/1.3 Handling liquid goods, bunkers and ballast pollution prevention  
.1 Preparing safety measures 
.2 Operating pumping equipment 
.3 Reporting and cleaning up spillage  
.4 Ballast handling  
.5 Tank cleaning  
 
B3/1.4 Preparing for sea  
 
B3/2 Cargo care  
 
B3/2.1 Operating shipboard equipment for cargo care  
B3/2.2 Taking measures for cargo care  
.1 Carrying out inspections  
.2 Describing damage to the cargo 
.3 Taking actions  
 
B4   Passenger care  
 
B4/1 Briefing and instruction  
 
B4/1.1 Conduct of passengers on board  
.1 General information on conduct of pas sengers  
.2 Briefing on prohibited areas, decks and spaces  
 
B4/1.2 Briefing on safety regulations, preventive measures and communications  
.1 The general emergency alarm  
.2 Preventing / reporting fire  
.3 PA announcements on emergency  
.4 Person overboard 
.5 Protective measures for children  
 
B4/2 Evacuation and boat drill  
 
B4/2.1 Allocating/directing to assembly stations, describing how to escape  
B4/2.2 Briefing on how to dress and what to take to assembly stations  
B4/2.3 Performing roll call  
B4/2.4 Briefing on  how to put on life -jackets  
B4/2.5 Instructions on how to embark and behave in lifeboats/liferafts  
B4/2.6 On-scene measures and actions in lifeboats/liferafts  
 
B4/3 Attending to passengers in an emergency  
 
B4/3.1 Informing on present situation  
B4/3.2 Escor ting helpless passengers  
 
 
 
Resolution A.918(22) 
Adopted on 29 November 2001  (Agenda item 9) 
IMO STANDARD MARINE COMMUNICATION PHRASES
 - 11 - A 22/Res.918 
 
 
I:\ASSEMBLY\22 \RES\918.doc INTRODUCTION  
 
1 Position of the IMO SMCP in maritime practice  
 
The IMO Standard Marine Communication Phrases (SMCP) has been compiled:  
 
- to assist in the greater safety of navigation and of the conduct of the ship, 
- to standard ize the language used in communication for navigation at sea, in port 
approaches, waterways and harbours, and on board vessels with multilingual crews, 
and 
- to assist maritime training institutions in meeting the objectives mentioned above. 
 
These phrases a re not intended to supplant or contradict the International Regulations for Preventing 
Collisions at Sea, 1972 or special local rules or recommendations made by IMO concerning ships' 
routeing, neither are they intended to supersede the International Code o f Signals, and their use in 
ship’s external communications has to be in strict compliance with the relevant radiotelephone 
procedures as set out in the ITU Radio Regulations.  Furthermore, the IMO SMCP, as a collection of 
individual phrases, should not be regarded as any kind of technical manual providing operational 
instructions. 
 
The IMO SMCP meets the requirements of the STCW Convention, 1978, as revised, and of the 
SOLAS Convention, 1974, as revised, regarding verbal communications; moreover, the phrases cover 
the relevant communication safety aspects laid down in these Conventions.  
 
Use of the IMO SMCP should be made as often as possible in preference to other wording of similar 
meaning; as a minimum requirement, users should adhere as closely as possi ble to them in relevant 
situations. In this way they are intended to become an acceptable safety language, using English for 
the verbal interchange of intelligence among individuals of all maritime nations on the many and 
varied occasions when precise mean ings and translations are in doubt, as is increasingly evident 
under modern conditions at sea. 
 
The accompanying CD/Cassette is designed to familiarize users with the pronunciation of the 
phrases. 
 
2 Organization of the IMO SMCP 
 
The IMO SMCP is divided in to External Communication Phrases and On -board Communication 
Phrases as far as its application is concerned, and into Part A and Part B as to its status within the 
framework of STCW 1978 as revised.  
 
Part A covers phrases applicable in external communicati ons, and may be regarded as the 
replacement of the Standard Marine Navigational Vocabulary 1985, which is required to be used and 
understood under the STCW Code, 1995, Table A -II/I.  This part is enriched by essential phrases 
concerning ship handling and s afety of navigation to be used in on- board communications, 
particularly when the Pilot is on the bridge, as required by Regulation 14(4), Chapter V, 
SOLAS  1974, as revised.  
 
Part B calls attention to other on- board standard safety-related phrases which, supplementary to 
Part A may also be regarded as useful for maritime English instruction.  
 
Resolution A.918(22) 
Adopted on 29 November 2001  (Agenda item 9) 
IMO STANDARD MARINE COMMUNICATION PHRASES
A 22/Res.918  - 12 - 
 
 
I:\ASSEMBLY\22 \RES\918.doc 3 Position of the IMO SMCP in Maritime Education and Training  
 
The IMO SMCP is not intended to provide a comprehensive maritime English syllabus, which is 
expected to cover a far wider range of language skills to be achieved in the fields of vocabulary, 
grammar, discourse abilities, etc., than the IMO SMCP could ever manage.  However, Part A in 
particular should be an indispensable part of any curriculum which is designed to meet the 
corresponding requirements of the STCW Convention 1978 as revised.  In addition, Part B offers 
a rich choice of situations covered by phrases well suited to meet the communication 
requirements of the STCW Convention 1978 as revised, which mariners are implicitly expected 
to satisfy.  
 
The IMO SMCP should be taught and learned selectively according to users’ specific needs, 
rather than in its entirety.  The respective instruction should be based on practice in the maritime 
environment, and shou ld be implemented through appropriate modern language teaching 
methods. 
 
4 Basic communicative features 
 
The IMO SMCP builds on a basic knowledge of the English language.  It was drafted 
intentionally in a simplified version of maritime English in order to reduce grammatical, lexical 
and idiomatic varieties to a tolerable minimum, using standardized structures for the sake of its 
function aspects, i.e. reducing misunderstanding in safety -related verbal communications, 
thereby endeavouring to reflect present  maritime English language usage on board vessels and in 
ship- to-shore/ship- to-ship communications.  
 
This means that in phrases offered for use in emergency and other situations developing under 
considerable pressure of time or psychological stress, as well as in navigational warnings, a block 
language is applied which uses sparingly or omits the function words the, a/an, is/are,  as done in 
seafaring practice. Users, however, may be flexible in this respect.  
 
Further communicative features may be summarized as follows:  
- avoiding synonyms 
- avoiding contracted forms 
- providing fully worded answers to "yes/no" -questions and basic alternative 
answers to sentence questions 
- providing one phrase for one event, and  
- structuring the corresponding phrases according to t he principle: identical 
invariable plus variable. 
 
5 Typographical conventions  
 
 ( )  brackets  indicate that the part of the message enclosed within the brackets 
may be added where relevant; 
 /  oblique strokes indicate that the items on either side of the stroke are 
alternatives; 
 ...  dots indicate that the relevant information is to be filled in where the dots 
occur; 
 
(italic letters)  indicate the kind of information requested; 
 
 ~  tildes precede possible words or phrases which can be used after/in 
association with the given standard phrase. 
 
Resolution A.918(22) 
Adopted on 29 November 2001  (Agenda item 9) 
IMO STANDARD MARINE COMMUNICATION PHRASES
 - 13 - A 22/Res.918 
 
 
I:\ASSEMBLY\22 \RES\918.doc GENERAL  
 
1 Procedure  
 
When it is necessary to indicate that the IMO SMCP are to be used, the following 
message may be sent:  
 
"Please use IMO Standard Marine Communication Phrases."  
 
"I will use IMO Standard Marine Communication Phrases."  
 
2 Spelling  
 
2.1 Spelling of letters 
 
When spelling is necessary, only the following spelling table should be used:  
 
Letter  Code  Letter  Code                 
     A Alfa      N Novem ber      
     B Bravo       O Oscar 
     C Char lie      P Papa 
     D      Delta        Q Quebec 
     E Echo      R Romeo 
     F Foxtrot      S      Sierra 
     G  Golf      T     Tango 
     H      Hotel       U Uniform  
     I India      V Victor 
     J Juliet      W Whis ky 
     K Kilo      X  X-ray 
     L Lima      Y Yankee 
     M  Mike       Z Zulu 
 
2.2  Spelling of digits and numbers  
 
A few digits and numbers have a modified  pronunciation compared to general English:  
 
Number  Spelling  Pronunciation  
0 zero ZEERO 
1 one WUN  
2 two TOO 
3 three TREE  
4 four FOW ER 
5 five FIFE 
6 six SIX 
7 seven  SEVEN 
8 eight  AIT 
9 nine NINER 
1000  thousand TOU SAND 
Resolution A.918(22) 
Adopted on 29 November 2001  (Agenda item 9) 
IMO STANDARD MARINE COMMUNICATION PHRASES
A 22/Res.918  - 14 - 
 
 
I:\ASSEMBLY\22 \RES\918.doc 3 Message Markers  
 
In shore- to-ship and ship- to-shore communication or radio communication in general, the 
following eight Message Markers may be used (also see " Application of Message 
Markers " given in PART A1/6  "Vessel Traffic Service (VTS) Standard Phrases"):  
 
(i) Instruction  
(ii) Advice  
(iii) Warning  
(iv) Information  
(v) Question  
(vi) Answer  
(vii) Request  
(viii)  Intention  
 
4 Responses  
 
4.1 When the answer to a question is in the affirmative, say: 
"Yes .... "  followed by the appropriate phrase in full. 
 
4.2 When the answer to a question is in the negative, say: 
"No ..." followed by the appropriate phrase in full. 
 
4.3 When the information requested is not immediately available, say:  
"Stand by" followed by the time interval within which the information will be  
available. 
 
4.4 When the information requested cannot be obtained, say:  
"No information."  
 
4.5 When an INSTRUCTION (e.g. by a VTS Station, n aval vessel or other fully authorized 
personnel ) or an ADVICE is given, respond if in the affirmative:  
"I will/can ... " - followed by the instruction or advice in full; and, 
if in the negative, respond:  
"I will not/cannot ... " - followed by the instruction or advice in full. 
 
Example: "ADVICE. Do not overtake the vessel North of you."  
Respond: "I will not overtake the vessel North of me."  
 
4.6 Responses to orders and answers to questions of special importance both in external and 
on-board communication a re given in wording in the phrases concerned. 
 
5 Distress, urgency and safety signals  
 
5.1 MAYDAY    to be used to announce a distress message  
 
5.2 PAN PAN     to be used to announce an urgency message 
 
5.3 SECURITE     to be used to announce a safety messag e 
 
Resolution A.918(22) 
Adopted on 29 November 2001  (Agenda item 9) 
IMO STANDARD MARINE COMMUNICATION PHRASES
 - 15 - A 22/Res.918 
 
 
I:\ASSEMBLY\22 \RES\918.doc 6 Standard organizational phrases   
 
6.1 "How do you read (me)?"  
 
6.1.1  "I read you ... 
bad/one   with signal strength one  (i.e. barely perceptible) 
poor/two    with signal strength two  (i.e. weak) 
fair/three   with signal strength three  (i.e. fairly g ood) 
good/four    with signal strength four  (i.e. good) 
excellent/five  with signal strength five  (i.e. very good)  
 
6.2 When it is advisable to remain on a VHF Channel / frequency, say: 
"Stand by on VHF Channel ... / frequency ... ".  
 
6.2.1  When it is accepted to remain on the VHF channel / frequency indicated, say:  
"Standing by on VHF Channel ... / frequency ... ".  
 
6.3 When it is advisable to change to another VHF Channel / frequency, say:  
"Advise (you) change to VHF Channel ... / frequency ... ."  
"Advise(you) try VHF Channel .. / frequency... .".  
 
6.3.1  When the changing of a VHF Channel / frequency is accepted, say:  
"Changing to VHF Channel ... / frequency ... .".  
 
7 Corrections  
 
When a mistake is made in a message, say:  
"Mistake ..." followed by the wo rd: 
"Correction ... " plus the corrected part of the message. 
 
Example: "My present speed is 14 knots  -  mistake. 
Correction, my present speed is 12, one -two, knots."  
 
8 Readiness  
 
"I am/I am not ready to receive your message".  
 
9 Repetition  
 
9.1 If any part of the message is considered sufficiently important to need safeguarding, say: 
  "Repeat ... " -  followed by the corresponding part of the message. 
 
Example: "My draft is 12.6 repeat one -two decimal 6 metres."  
 "Do not overtake -  repeat -  do not overtake."  
 
9.2 When a message is not properly heard, say:  
 "Say again (please)."  
 
Resolution A.918(22) 
Adopted on 29 November 2001  (Agenda item 9) 
IMO STANDARD MARINE COMMUNICATION PHRASES
A 22/Res.918  - 16 - 
 
 
I:\ASSEMBLY\22 \RES\918.doc 10 Numbers  
 
Numbers are to be spoken in separate digits:  
 
"One -five -zero" for 150  
"Two decimal five" or  
 Two point five” for 2.5  
 
Note: Attention! When rudder angles, e.g. in wh eel orders, are given, say:  
 
"Fifteen" for 15 or  
"Twenty" for 20, etc. 
 
11 Positions  
 
11.1 When latitude and longitude are used, these shall be expressed in degrees and minutes (and 
decimals of a minute if necessary), North or South of the Equator and East or West of 
Greenwich.  
 
Example:  "WARNING. Dangerous wreck in position 15 degrees 34 minutes North 061 
degrees 29 minutes West."  
 
11.2 When the position is related to a mark, the mark shall be a well -defined charted object.  The 
bearing shall be in the 36 0 degrees notation from true north and shall be that of the position 
FROM the mark.  
 
Example:  "Your position  bearing 137 degrees from Big Head lighthouse 
distance 2.4 nautical miles."  
 
12 Bearings  
 
The bearing of the mark or vessel concerned is the bearin g in the 360 degree notation from 
north (true north unless otherwise stated), except in the case of relative bearings.  Bearings 
may be either FROM the mark or FROM the vessel.  
 
Examples: "Pilot boat is bearing 215 degrees from you."  
 
Note:  Vessels reporti ng their position should always quote their bearing FROM the  
 mark, as described in paragraph 11.2 of this section.  
 
12.1 Relative bearings  
 
Relative bearings can be expressed in degrees relative to the vessel's head. More frequently 
this is in relation to the port or starboard bow.  
 
Example:  "Buoy 030 degrees on your port bow."  
(Relative D/F bearings are more commonly expressed in the 360 degree notation.) 
 
13 Courses  
 
Always to be expressed in 360 degree notation from north (true north unless otherwise 
stated).  Whether this is to TO or FROM a mark can be stated.  
Resolution A.918(22) 
Adopted on 29 November 2001  (Agenda item 9) 
IMO STANDARD MARINE COMMUNICATION PHRASES
 - 17 - A 22/Res.918 
 
 
I:\ASSEMBLY\22 \RES\918.doc 14 Distances  
 
To be expressed in nautical miles or cables (tenths of a mile), the unit always to be stated.  
 
15 Speed  
 
To be expressed in knots:  
 
15.1 without further notation, meaning speed th rough the water; or,  
 
15.2.1.1  "ground speed", meaning speed over the ground.  
 
16 Times 
 
Times should be expressed in the 24 hour UTC notation; if local time will be used in ports or 
harbours it should clearly be stated.  
 
17 Geographical names 
 
Place names used should be those on the chart or in Sailing Directions in use. 
Should these not be understood, latitude and longitude should be given.  
 
18 Ambiguous words  
 
Some words in English have meanings depending on the context in which they appear.  
Misundersta ndings frequently occur, especially in VTS communications, and have produced 
accidents. Such words are:  
 
18.1 The conditionals "may", "might", "should" and "could"  
 
May 
Do not say:  "May I enter the fairway?"  
Say:  "QUESTION. Do I have permission to enter the fairway?"  
Do not say: "You may enter the fairway."  
Say:  "ANSWER. You have permission to enter the fairway."  
Might  
Do not say: "I might enter the fairway."  
Say:  "INTENTION. I will enter the fairway."  
Should  
Do not say: "You should anchor in anchorage B 3."  
Say:  "ADVICE. Anchor in anchorage B 3."  
Could 
Do not say: "You could be running into danger."  
Say:  "WARNING. You are running into danger."  
 
18.2 The word "can"  
 
The word "can" describes either the possibility or the capability of doing something.  In the 
IMO SMCP the situations where phrases using the word "can" appear make it clear whether a 
possibility is referred to.  In an ambiguous context, however, say, for example: "QUESTION. 
Do I have permission to use the shallow draft fairway at this time?"  Do  not say: "Can I use 
the shallow draft fairway at this time?" if you are asking for a permission.   (The same applies 
to the word "may"). 
 
Note: In all cases the  radiotelephone procedures as set out in the ITU Radio Regulations have to 
be observed. 
Resolution A.918(22) 
Adopted on 29 November 2001  (Agenda item 9) 
IMO STANDARD MARINE COMMUNICATION PHRASES
A 22/Res.918  - 18 - 
 
 
I:\ASSEMBLY\22 \RES\918.doc GLOSSARY  
 
The Glossary includes a limited number of technical terms which do not appear in the text of the 
IMO SMCP, but might be useful in case the content of a given standard Phrase requires modification.  
 
1 General terms  
 
Abandon vessel (to)   To evacuate crew and passengers from a vessel following a distress 
 
Accommodation ladder  Ladder attached to platform at vessel's side with flat steps and handrails 
enabling persons to embark / disembark from water or shore 
 
Adrift       Uncontrolled movement at sea under the influence of current, tide or wind  
 
Air draft      The height from the waterline to the highest point of the vessel  
 
Assembly station   Place on deck, in mess rooms, etc., assigned to crew and passengers 
where they have to meet according to the muster l ist when the 
corresponding alarm is released or announcement made  
 
Backing (of wind)    Shift of wind direction in an anticlockwise manner, for example from 
north to west (opposite of veering) 
 
Beach (to)      To run a vessel up on a beach to prevent its sinking in deep water 
 
Berth       .1 A sea room to be kept for safety around a vessel, rock, platform, etc. 
      .2 The place assigned to a vessel when anchored or lying alongside a 
pier, etc. 
 
Blast      A whistle signal made by the vessel  
 
Blind sector     An area which cannot be scanned by the ship’s radar because it is shielded 
by parts of the superstructure, masts, etc. 
 
Boarding arrangements  All equipment, such as pilot ladder, accommodation ladder, hoist, etc., 
necessary for a safe transfer of the pilot 
 
Boarding speed   The speed of a vessel adjusted to that of a pilot boat at which the pilot can 
safely embark/disembark  
 
Bob-cat     A mini -caterpillar with push -blade used for the careful distribution of 
loose goods in cargo holds of bulk carriers 
 
Briefing     Concise explanatory information to crew and/or passengers 
 
Cable       .1 Chain connecting a vessel to the anchor(s) 
      .2 Wire or rope primarily used for mooring a ship 
      .3 (Measurement) one hundred fathoms or one tenth of a nautical mile  
 
Capsize (to)     To turn over 
 
Cardinal buoy     A seamark, i.e. a buoy, indicating the north, east, south or west, i.e. the 
cardinal points from a fixed point such as a wreck, shallow water, 
banks,  etc. 
Resolution A.918(22) 
Adopted on 29 November 2001  (Agenda item 9) 
IMO STANDARD MARINE COMMUNICATION PHRASES
 - 19 - A 22/Res.918 
 
 
I:\ASSEMBLY\22 \RES\918.doc  
Cardinal points     The four main points of the compass: north, east, south and west 
 
Casualty     Here: case of death in an accident or shipping disaster 
 
Check (to)     .1 To make sure that equipment etc. is in proper condition or that 
everything is correct and safe 
      .2  To regulate motion of a cable,  rope or wire when it is running out too 
fast 
 
Close-coupled towing  A method of towing vessels through polar ice by means of icebreaking 
tugs with a special stern notch suited to receive and hold the bow of the 
vessel to be towed  
 
Close up (to)     To decrease the distance to the vessel ahead by increasing one’s own 
speed  
 
Compatibility (of goods) Indicates whether different goods can be safely stowed together in one 
cargo space or in an adjacent hold.  
 
Vessel constrained   A vessel severely restricted by h er draught in her ability to deviate from  
by her draft    the course followed in relation to the available depth and width of 
navigable water 
 
Convoy     A group of vessels which sail together, e.g. through a canal or ice 
 
Course      The intended directi on of movement of a vessel through the water 
 
Course made good   That course which a vessel makes good over ground, after allowing for 
the effect of currents, tidal streams, and leeway caused by wind and sea 
 
COW       Crude Oil Washing: a system of cleanin g the cargo tanks by washing 
them with the cargo of crude oil during discharge  
 
CPA/TCPA    Closest Point of Approach/Time to Closest Point of Approach: limit as 
defined by the observer to give warning when a tracked target or targets 
will close to within these limits 
 
Crash -stop      An emergency reversal operation of the main engine(s) to avoid a 
collision  
 
Damage control team   A group of crew members trained for fighting flooding in the vessel  
 
Datum      .1 The most probable position of a search target at a given time  
      .2 The plane of reference to which all data as to the depth on charts are 
referenced  
 
Derelict     Vessel still afloat, abandoned at sea 
 
Destination     Port for which a vessel is bound  
 
Disabled      A vessel damaged or impaired in su ch a manner as to be incapable of 
proceeding on its voyage  
 
Resolution A.918(22) 
Adopted on 29 November 2001  (Agenda item 9) 
IMO STANDARD MARINE COMMUNICATION PHRASES
A 22/Res.918  - 20 - 
 
 
I:\ASSEMBLY\22 \RES\918.doc Disembark (to)          To go from a vessel  
 
Distress alert (GMDSS)  A radio signal from a distressed vessel automatically directed to an 
MRCC giving position, identification, course and speed of th e vessel as 
well as the nature of distress 
 
Distress/      Here: the verbal exchange of information on radio from ship to shore  
Urgency traffic     and/or ship to ship / aircraft about a distress / urgency situation as defined 
in the relevant ITU Radio Regulations  
 
Draught (or draft)    Depth in water at which a vessel floats 
 
Dragging (of anchor)   Moving of an anchor over the sea bottom involuntarily because it is no 
longer preventing the movement of the vessel  
 
Dredging (of anchor)   Moving of an anchor over the sea bottom to control the movement of the 
vessel  
 
Drifting      Being driven along by the wind, tide or current 
 
Drop back (to)     To increase the distance from the vessel ahead by reducing one's own 
speed 
 
DSC       Digital Selective Calling (in the GM DSS system)  
 
Embark (to)     To go aboard a vessel  
 
EPIRB      Emergency Position Indicating Radio Beacon 
 
Escape route     A clearly marked way in the vessel which has to be followed in case of an 
emergency  
 
Escort Attending a vessel to be available in case of need, e.g. ice- breaker, 
tug, etc. 
 
ETA       Estimated Time of Arrival  
 
ETD       Estimated Time of Departure 
 
Fathom      A measure of 6 feet  
 
Fire patrol      A member of the watch going around the vessel at certain intervals so that 
an outbreak of fir e may be promptly detected; mandatory in vessels 
carrying more than 36 passengers 
 
Flooding      Major uncontrolled flow of seawater into the vessel  
 
Fire monitor     Fixed foam/powder/water cannon shooting fire-extinguishing agents on 
tank deck, manifold et c. 
 
Foul (of anchor)   Anchor has its own cable twisted around it or has fouled an obstruction  
 
Foul (of propeller)    A line, wire, net, etc., is wound round the propeller  
 
Resolution A.918(22) 
Adopted on 29 November 2001  (Agenda item 9) 
IMO STANDARD MARINE COMMUNICATION PHRASES
 - 21 - A 22/Res.918 
 
 
I:\ASSEMBLY\22 \RES\918.doc Full speed     Highest possible speed of a vessel  
 
Fumes       Often harmful gas pro duced by fires, chemicals, fuel, etc. 
 
General emergency alarm A sound signal of seven short blasts and one prolonged blast given with 
the vessel´s sound system  
 
Give way     To keep out of the way of another vessel  
 
GMDSS     Global Maritime Distress and Safety System  
 
(D) GPS     (Differential) Global (satellite) Positioning System  
 
Half cardinal points   The four main points lying between the cardinal points: north east,  
      south east, south west and north west 
 
Hampered vessel    A vessel restricted by her ability to manoeuvre by the nature of her work  
 
Hatchrails      Ropes supported by stanchions around an open hatch to prevent persons 
from falling into a hold 
 
Heading The horizontal direction of the vessel's bows at a given moment 
measured in degrees clockwise from north  
 
Hoist       Here: a cable used by helicopters for lifting or lowering persons in a 
pick-up operation  
 
Icing      Coating of ice on an object, e.g. the mast or superstructure of a vessel  
 
IMO Class      Group of dangerous or hazardous go ods, harmful substances or marine 
pollutants in sea transport as classified in the International Maritime 
Dangerous Goods Code (IMDG Code) 
 
Inert (to)  To reduce the oxygen in a tank by inert gas to avoid an explosive 
atmosphere 
 
Initial course     Course di rected by the OSC or other authorized person to be steered at the 
beginning of a search  
 
Inoperative      Not functioning  
 
Jettison (to) (of cargo)   To throw goods overboard in order to lighten the vessel or improve its 
stability in case of an emergency  
 
Launch (to)     To lower, e.g. lifeboats, to the water 
 
Leaking      Escape of liquids such as water, oil, etc., out of pipes, boilers, tanks, etc., 
or a minor inflow of seawater into the vessel due to  damage to the hull 
 
Leeward     On or towards the shelte red side of a ship; opposite of windward  
 
Leeway     Vessel’s sideways drift leeward of the desired course 
 
Let go (to)      To set free, let loose, or cast off (of anchors, lines, etc.) 
Resolution A.918(22) 
Adopted on 29 November 2001  (Agenda item 9) 
IMO STANDARD MARINE COMMUNICATION PHRASES
A 22/Res.918  - 22 - 
 
 
I:\ASSEMBLY\22 \RES\918.doc  
Lifeboat station   Place assigned to crew and passengers to muster be fore being ordered into 
the lifeboats 
 
List      Here: inclination of the vessel to port side or starboard side  
 
Located     In navigational warnings: Position of object confirmed  
 
Make water (to)   To have seawater flowing into the vessel due to hull damag e, or 
hatches awash and not properly closed 
 
MMSI       Maritime Mobile Service Identity number 
 
Moor (to)      To secure a vessel in a particular place by means of wires or ropes made 
fast to the shore, to anchors, or to anchored mooring buoys, or to ride w ith 
both anchors down  
 
MRCC       Maritime Rescue Co -ordination Centre: land- based authority responsible  
      for promoting efficient organization of maritime search and rescue and for  
      co-ordinating the conduct of search and rescue operations within a search  
      and rescue region 
 
Muster (to)      To assemble crew, passengers or both in a special place for purposes of 
checking 
 
Muster list      List of crew, passengers and others on board and their functions in a distress or 
drill 
 
Not under command   (abbr. NUC): a vessel which through exceptional circumstances is unable 
to manoeuvre as required by the COLREGs  
 
Obstruction     An object such as a wreck, net, etc., which blocks a fairway, route, etc. 
 
Off air       When the transmissions of a radio stati on, etc., have broken down, been 
switched off or suspended  
 
Off station (of buoys)   Not in charted position  
 
Oil clearance    Oil skimming from the surface of the water 
 
Operational     Ready for immediate use 
 
Ordnance exercise    Naval firing practice 
 
OSC      On-Scene Co -ordinator: A person designed to co -ordinate search and 
rescue operations within a specified area 
 
Overflow      Escape of oil or liquid from a tank because of a twofold condition as a 
result of overflowing, thermal expansion, change in ve ssel trim or vessel 
movement  
 
Polluter      A vessel emitting harmful substances into the air or spilling oil into the sea 
 
Resolution A.918(22) 
Adopted on 29 November 2001  (Agenda item 9) 
IMO STANDARD MARINE COMMUNICATION PHRASES
 - 23 - A 22/Res.918 
 
 
I:\ASSEMBLY\22 \RES\918.doc Preventers      Ropes or wires attached to derricks to prevent them from swinging during 
cargo handling operations  
 
Proceed (to)     To sail or head for a certain position or to continue with the voyage  
 
PA-system     Public address system: loudspeakers in the vessel's cabins, mess rooms, 
etc., and on deck through which important information can be broadcast 
from a central point, mostly from the navigation bridge  
 
Recover (to)     Here: to pick up shipwrecked persons  
 
Refloat (to)      To pull a vessel off after grounding; to set afloat again 
 
Rendez -vous     An appointment between vessels normally made on radio to meet in a 
certain area or position  
 
Reported     In navigational warnings: position of object unconfirmed  
 
Restricted area     A deck, space, area, etc., in vessels where, for safety reasons, entry is only 
permitted for authorized crew members 
 
Resume (to)     Here: to re-start a voy age, service or search  
 
Retreat signal     Sound, visual or other signal to a team ordering it to return to its base 
 
Rig move      The movement of an oil rig, drilling platform, etc., from one position to 
another 
 
Roll call     The act of checking how many passengers and crew members are present, 
e.g. at assembly stations, by reading aloud a list of their names 
 
Safe speed     That speed of a vessel allowing time for effective action to be taken under 
prevailing circumstances and conditions to avoid a collis ion and to be 
stopped within an appropriate distance 
 
SWL       Safe working load: maximum working load of lifting equipment that  
      should not be exceeded  
 
Safe working pressure   The maximum permissible pressure in cargo hoses 
 
SAR       Search and Rescu e 
 
SART       Search and Rescue Transponder 
 
Scene       The area or location where the event, e.g. an accident, has happened  
 
Search pattern   A pattern according to which vessels and/or aircraft may conduct a 
co-ordinated search (the IMOSAR offers seven search patterns) 
 
Search speed     The speed of searching vessels directed by the OSC  
 
Seamark      A navigational aid placed to act as a beacon or warning  
 
 
Resolution A.918(22) 
Adopted on 29 November 2001  (Agenda item 9) 
IMO STANDARD MARINE COMMUNICATION PHRASES
A 22/Res.918  - 24 - 
 
 
I:\ASSEMBLY\22 \RES\918.doc  
 
Segregation(of goods)   Separation of goods which for different reasons must not be stowed 
together 
 
Shackle      .1 Length of chain cable measuring 15 fathoms  
      .2 U-shaped link closed with a pin used for connecting purposes 
 
Shifting cargo     Transverse movement of cargo, especially bulk cargo, caused by rolling or a 
heavy list 
 
Slings       Ropes, nets, and any other means for handling general cargoes 
 
Speed of advance   The speed at which a storm centre moves 
 
Spill       The accidental escape of  oil, etc., from a vessel, container, etc., into the 
sea 
 
Spill control gear    Anti-pollution equipment for combating accidental spills of oils or  
      chemicals  
 
Elongated spreader    Here: step of a pilot ladder which prevents the ladder from twisting  
 
Stand by (to)     To be in readiness or prepared to execute an order; to be readily available  
 
Stand clear (to)     Here: to keep a boat away from the vessel  
 
Standing orders    Orders of the Master to the officer of the watch which he/she must comply with  
 
Stand on (to)     To maintain course and speed  
 
Station       The allotted place or the duties of each person on board  
 
Stripping     Final pumping of tank’s residues 
  
Survivor    A person who continues to live in spite of being in an extremely 
dangerous situation, e.g. a shipping disaster. 
 
Take off (to)     To lift off from a vessel's deck (helicopter) 
 
Target      The echo generated, e.g. by a vessel, on a radar screen  
 
Tension winch     A winch which applies tension to mooring lines to keep them tight  
 
TEU       Twenty Foot Equivalent Unit (standard container dimension)  
 
Track      The path followed, or to be fo llowed, between one position and another 
 
Transit       Here: the passage of a vessel through a canal, fairway, etc. 
 
Transit speed    Speed of a vessel required for passage through a canal, fairway, etc. 
 
Transhipment (of cargo)  Here: the transfer of goods  from one vessel to another outside harbours 
 
Resolution A.918(22) 
Adopted on 29 November 2001  (Agenda item 9) 
IMO STANDARD MARINE COMMUNICATION PHRASES
 - 25 - A 22/Res.918 
 
 
I:\ASSEMBLY\22 \RES\918.doc Underway      Describes a vessel which is not at anchor, or made fast to the shore, or 
aground 
 
Union purchase    A method of cargo handling by combining two derricks, one of which is 
fixed over the hatch, the ot her over the ship’s side  
 
Unlit       When the light of a buoy or a lighthouse are inoperative  
 
UTC       Universal Time Co -ordinated (GMT) 
 
Variable (of winds)   A wind that is constantly changing speed and direction  
 
Veering (of winds)   Clockwise change in the direction of the wind; opposite of backing  
 
Veer out (to)(of anchors)  To let out a greater length of cable  
 
VHF    Very High Frequency (30 -300 MHz)  
 
Walk out (to) (of anchors)  To reverse the action of a windlass to lower the anchor until it is  
      clear of the hawse pipe and ready for dropping 
 
Walk back (to)    To reverse the action of a windlass to ease the cable (of anchors) 
 
Waypoint      A position a vessel has to pass or at which she has to alter course 
according to her voyage plan  
 
Windward      The general direction from which the wind blows; opposite of leeward  
 
Wreck      A vessel which has been destroyed, sunk or abandoned at sea 
 
2 VTS special terms  
 
Fairway     Navigable part of a waterway  
 
Fairway speed    Mandatory speed in a fairway  
 
ITZ      Inshore Traffic Zone (of a TSS): A routing measure comprising a 
designated area between the landward boundary of a TSS and the adjacent 
coast 
 
Manoeuvring speed   A vessel’s reduced speed in circumstances where it may be required to 
use the engines at short notice 
 
Receiving point   A mark or place at which a vessel comes under obligatory entry, transit, or 
escort procedure 
 
Reference line     A line displayed on the radar screens in VTS Centres and/or electronic 
sea-charts separating the fairway for i nbound and outbound vessels so that 
they can safely pass each other 
 
Reporting point   A mark or position at which a vessel is required to report to the local VTS 
Station to establish its position 
Resolution A.918(22) 
Adopted on 29 November 2001  (Agenda item 9) 
IMO STANDARD MARINE COMMUNICATION PHRASES
A 22/Res.918  - 26 - 
 
 
I:\ASSEMBLY\22 \RES\918.doc  
Separation zone / line   A zone or line separating the traffic lanes in which vessels are proceeding 
in opposite or nearly opposite directions; or separating a traffic lane from 
the  adjacent sea area; or separating traffic lanes designated for particular 
classes  of vessels proceeding in the same direction  
 
Traffic clearance   VTS authorization for a vessel to proceed under conditions specified  
 
Traffic lane     An area within defined limits in which one -way traffic is established  
 
TSS      Traffic Separation Scheme: a routeing measure aimed at the separation of 
opposing streams of traffic by appropriate means and by the establishment 
of traffic lanes 
 
VTS       Vessel Traffic Services: services designed to improve the safety and 
efficiency of vessel traffic and to protect the environment  
 
VTS area     Area control led by a VTS Centre or VTS Station  
 
 
 
Resolution A.918(22) 
Adopted on 29 November 2001  (Agenda item 9) 
IMO STANDARD MARINE COMMUNICATION PHRASES
 - 27 - A 22/Res.918 
 
 
I:\ASSEMBLY\22 \RES\918.doc 
 
Resolution A.918(22) 
Adopted on 29 November 2001  (Agenda item 9) 
IMO STANDARD MARINE COMMUNICATION PHRASES
A 22/Res.918  - 28 - 
 
 
I:\ASSEMBLY\22 \RES\918.doc  
 
 
 
 freeboard ~---------------l-
air draft 
1 
I 
t 
draft 
t 
-.. ----~---------'--------~- ---~ , 
under-keel clearance 
'T 
SKETCH 2 
Resolution A.918(22) 
Adopted on 29 November 2001  (Agenda item 9) 
IMO STANDARD MARINE COMMUNICATION PHRASES
 - 29 - A 22/Res.918 
 
 
I:\ASSEMBLY\22 \RES\918.doc 
 
Resolution A.918(22) 
Adopted on 29 November 2001  (Agenda item 9) 
IMO STANDARD MARINE COMMUNICATION PHRASES
A 22/Res.918  - 30 - 
 
 
I:\ASSEMBLY\22 \RES\918.doc IMO STANDARD   MARINE   COMMUNICATION  PHRASES: PART  A 
 
Part A covers phrases applicable in external communications from ship to shore, shore to ship and 
ship to ship as required by STCW 1978, as revised, T able A -II/1, as well as phrases applicable on 
board vessels in conversations between Pilots and bridge teams as required by Regulation 14(4) of 
Chapter V of SOLAS 1974, as revised.  
 
A1 EXTERNAL COMMUNICATION PHRASES  
Attention:  The use of Standard Phrases in vessels' external communications does not in any way 
exempt from application of the radiotelephone procedures as set out in the ITU Radio Regulations.  
 
A1/1  Distress traffic  
 The distress traffic controlling station/other stations may impose radio si lence on 
any interfering stations by using the term “Seelonce Mayday/Distress”, unless 
the latter have messages about the distress.  
 
A1/1.1   Distress communications  
Note: A distress traffic  always has to commence with stating the position of the vessel 
in distress as specified in “GENERAL 11 Positions /13 Bearings” if it is not included 
in the DSC distress alert. 
 
.1  Fire, explosion  
 
 .1 I am/MV ...  on fire (- after explosion).  
 .2 Where is the fire? 
 .2.1  Fire is  
       ~ on deck.  
    ~ in engine -room.  
    ~ in hold(s). 
    ~ in superstructure/accommodation/... . 
 .3 Are dangerous goods on fire? 
 .3.1  Yes, dangerous goods are on fire. 
 .3.2   No, dangerous goods are not on fire. 
 .4 Is there danger of explosion?  
 .4.1  Yes, danger of explosion.  
 .4.2  No danger of explosion.  
 .5 I am / MV  ...  not under command.  
 .6 Is the fire under control?  
 .6.1  Yes, fire is under control.  
 .6.2  No, fire is not under control.  
 .7 What kind of assistance is required?  
 .7.1  I do not / MV ... does not require assistance. 
 .7.2  I require / MV ... requires 
    ~ fire fighting assistance. 
    ~ breathing apparatus - smoke is toxic. 
    ~ foam extinguishers/CO 2  extinguishers. 
    ~ fire pumps. 
    ~ medical assistance/... . 
 .8  Report injured persons. 
 .8.1  No persons injured.  
 .8.2  Number of injured persons/casualties: ... . 
Resolution A.918(22) 
Adopted on 29 November 2001  (Agenda item 9) 
IMO STANDARD MARINE COMMUNICATION PHRASES
 - 31 - A 22/Res.918 
 
 
I:\ASSEMBLY\22 \RES\918.doc .2  Flooding  
 
 .1 I am/MV ... is flooding below water line/in the engine room/in the hold(s). 
 .2 I/MV ...  cannot control flooding.  
 .3 What kind of assistance is required?  
 .3.1  I require/MV  ... requires  pumps/divers, ... . 
 .3.2  I will send pumps/divers/... . 
 .3.3  I cannot send pumps/divers ... . 
 .4 I have/MV ... has  dangerous list to port side/starboard.  
 .5 I am/MV ...  in critical condition.  
 .6 Flooding is under control.  
 .7 I  /MV  ... can proceed without assistance. 
 .8 I require/  MV ... requires escort/tug assistance/... . 
 
.3  Collision  
 
 .1 I have /  MV ... has collided  
   ~ with MV... . 
   ~ with unknown vessel / object / ... . 
   ~ with ...(name) light vessel.  
   ~ with seama rk ... (charted name). 
   ~ with iceberg/ ... . 
 .2 Report damage. 
 .2.1  I have / MV .. has damage above / below  water line. 
 .2.2  I am / MV ...  not under command.  
 .2.3  I/MV ….cannot establish damage. 
 .2.4  I  / MV cannot repair damage. 
 .2.5  I / M V ... can only proceed at slow speed.  
 .3 What kind of assistance is required?  
 .3.1  I require / MV ... requires / escort / tug assistance /... . 
 
.4  Grounding  
 
 .1 I am / MV ... aground.  
 .2 I require / MV ...  requires tug assistance / pumps / ... . 
 .3 What part of your vessel is aground?  
 .3.1  Aground forward / amidships /aft / full length.  
 .3.2  I cannot establish which part is aground.  
 .4 Warning. Uncharted rocks in position ... . 
 .5 Risk of grounding at low water. 
 .6 I / MV ... will jettison cargo to refloat. 
 .6.1  Warning! Do not jettison IMO -Class cargo!  
 .7 When do you / does MV ...   expect to refloat?  
 .7.1  I expect /  MV ... expects to refloat  
    ~ at ... UTC. 
    ~ when tide rises. 
    ~ when weather improves. 
    ~ when draft decreases. 
    ~ with tug assistance / ... . 
 .8 Can you / can MV ...  beach?  
 .8.1  I / MV ... can / will beach in position ... . 
 .8.2  I / MV ... cannot beach.  
 
Resolution A.918(22) 
Adopted on 29 November 2001  (Agenda item 9) 
IMO STANDARD MARINE COMMUNICATION PHRASES
A 22/Res.918  - 32 - 
 
 
I:\ASSEMBLY\22 \RES\918.doc .5  List - danger of capsizing  
 
 .1 I have / MV ... has  dangerous list to port / starboard.  
 .2 I / MV ...  will 
   ~ transfer cargo / bunkers to stop listing.  
   ~ jettison cargo to stop listing.  
 .3 I am / MV ... in danger of capsizing (list increasing). 
 
.6  Sinking  
.1 I am / MV ... sinking after collision / grounding / flooding / explosion /. 
 .2 I require / MV ... requires assistance. 
 .3 I am / MV ... proceeding to your assistance. 
 .4 ETA at distress position within ... hours / at ... UTC. 
 
.7  Disabled and adrift  
 
 .1 I am / MV ... 
   ~ not under command.  
   ~ adrift. 
   ~ drifting at ... knot s to  ... (cardinal points). 
   ~ drifting into danger. 
 .2 I require / MV ...  requires tug assistance. 
 
.8  Armed attack / piracy  
 
 .1 I am / MV  ... under attack by pirates. 
 .1.1  I / MV ... was under attack by pirates. 
 .2 I require / MV ... requires  assistance. 
 .3 What kind of assistance is required?  
 .3.1  I require / MV ... requires 
    ~ medical assistance. 
    ~ navigational assistance. 
    ~ military assistance. 
    ~ tug assistance. 
    ~ escort / ... . 
 .4 Report damage. 
 .4.1  I have / MV .. has 
    ~  no damage. 
    ~ damage to navigational equipment / ... . 
 .4.2   I am / MV ... not under command.  
 .5 Can you / can MV ...  proceed?  
 .5.1  Yes, I / MV ... can proceed.  
 .5.2  No,  I / MV ... cannot proceed.  
 
.9  Undesignated distress  
 
 .1 I have / MV ... has problems with cargo / engine(s) / navigation / ... . 
 .2 I require / MV ... requires ... . 
 
Resolution A.918(22) 
Adopted on 29 November 2001  (Agenda item 9) 
IMO STANDARD MARINE COMMUNICATION PHRASES
 - 33 - A 22/Res.918 
 
 
I:\ASSEMBLY\22 \RES\918.doc .10  Abandoning vessel  
 
 .1  I / crew of MV ... must abandon vessel ... after explosion / collision / 
  grounding / flooding / piracy / armed attack / ... .    
 
.11  Person overboard 
 
 . 1 I have / MV ... has lost person(s) overboard in position ... . 
 . 2 Assist with search in vicinity of position ... . 
 . 3 All vessels in vicinity of position ... keep sharp lookout and report to ... . 
 . 4 I am / MV… is proceeding for assistance.  ETA at ... UTC / within ... hours.    
 . 5 Search in vicinity of position ... . 
 . 5.1  I am / MV ... is searching in vicinity of position ... . 
 . 6 Aircraft ETA at ... UTC / within ... hours to assist in search.  
 . 7 Can you continue search?  
 . 7.1  Yes, I can continue search.  
 . 7.2   No, I cannot continue search.  
 . 8 Stop search.  
 . 8.1  Return to ... . 
 . 8.2  Proceed with your voyage. 
 .10 What is the result of search?  
 .10.1   The result of  search is negative. 
 .11 I / MV ... located / picked up  person(s) in position ... . 
 .12 Person picked up is crew/member / passenger of MV ... . 
 .13 What is condition of person(s)? 
 .13.1   Condition of person(s) bad / good.  
 .13.2   Person(s) dead.  
 
  
A1/1.2  Search and Rescue communication  
 
.1  SAR communications  (specifying or supplementary to 1.1)  
 
 . 1 I require / MV ... requires assistance. 
 . 2 I am / MV ... proceeding to your assistance. 
 . 3 What is your MMSI number? 
 . 3.1  My MMSI number is …. . 
. 4 What is your positio n? 
 . 4.1  My position ... . 
 . 5 What is your present course and speed?  
 . 5.1  My present course  ... degrees, my speed  ...  knots. 
 . 6 Report number of persons on board.  
 . 6.1  Number of persons on board: ... . 
 . 7 Report injured persons. 
 . 7.1  No person injured  
 . 7.2  Number of injured persons / casualties:  ... . 
 . 8 Will you abandon vessel?  
 . 8.1  I will not abandon vessel.  
 . 8.2  I will abandon vessel at ... UTC. 
 . 9 Is your EPIRB/SART transmitting?  
 . 9.1  Yes, my EPIRB/SART is transmitti ng. 
Resolution A.918(22) 
Adopted on 29 November 2001  (Agenda item 9) 
IMO STANDARD MARINE COMMUNICATION PHRASES
A 22/Res.918  - 34 - 
 
 
I:\ASSEMBLY\22 \RES\918.doc  . 9.2  Yes, my EPIRB/SART is transmitting by mistake. 
 .10 Did you transmit a DSC distress alert?  
 .10.1   Yes, I transmitted a DSC alert. 
 .10.2   Yes, I transmitted a DSC alert by mistake. 
.11 How many lifeboats / liferafts (with how many persons) will you launch?  
 .11.1   I will launch ... lifeboats / liferafts (with ... persons). 
 .12 How many persons will stay on board?  
 .12.1   No person will stay on board.  
 .12.2    ... persons will stay on board.  
 .13 What is the weather situation in your position?  
 .13.1  Wind ...( cardinal points) force Beaufort ... . 
.13.2  Visibility good/moderate/poor. 
.13.3   Smooth/moderate/rough/high sea / slight/moderate/heavy swell … (cardinal 
points). 
 .13.4   Current ... knots, to …(cardinal points).   
 .14 Are there dangers to navigation?  
 .14.1   No dangers to navigation.  
 .14.2   Warning! Uncharted rocks / ice / abnormally low tides / mines / ... . 
 
.2  Acknowledgement and / or relay of SAR messages  
 
 . 1 Received MAYDAY from MV ... at UTC on VHF Channel.../ frequency .... 
 . 2 Vessel in position ...  
   ~ on fire  
   ~ had explosion.  
   ~ flooded.  
   ~ in collision (with .. ). 
   ~ listing / in danger of capsizing.  
   ~ sinking.  
   ~ disabled and adrift. 
   ~ abandoned / ... . 
 . 3 Vessel requires assistance. 
 . 4 Received yo ur MAYDAY. 
 . 4.1  My position  ... . 
 . 4.2  I / MV ... will proceed to your assistance. 
 . 4.3  ETA at distress position within ... hours / at ... UTC. 
 
.3  Performing / co-ordinating SAR operations  
The questions are normally asked and advice given by the On -scene Co- ordinator 
(OSC).   
For further information see IAMSAR Manual, London/Montreal,1998.  
 
 . 1 I will act as On -scene Co -ordinator. 
 . 1.1  I will show  following signals / lights: ... . 
 . 2 Can you proceed to distress position?  
 . 2.1  Yes, I can proceed to distress position.  
 . 2.2   No, I cannot  proceed to distress position.  
 . 3 What is your ETA at distress position?  
 . 3.1  My ETA at distress position within ... hours / at ... UTC. 
 . 4  MAYDAY position is not correct. 
 . 4.1  Correct MAYDAY  position is ... . 
 . 5 Vessels are advised to proceed to position ... to start rescue. 
 
Resolution A.918(22) 
Adopted on 29 November 2001  (Agenda item 9) 
IMO STANDARD MARINE COMMUNICATION PHRASES
 - 35 - A 22/Res.918 
 
 
I:\ASSEMBLY\22 \RES\918.doc  . 6 Carry out search pattern ... starting at ... UTC. 
 . 7 Initial course ... degrees, search speed ... knots. 
 . 8 Carry out radar search.  
 . 9 MV ...  allocated track number ... . 
 .10 MV / MVs ... adjust interval between vessels to ...kilometres / nautical miles. 
 .11 Adjust track spacing to ...kilometres / nautical miles. 
 .12 Search speed  now  ... knots. 
 .13 Alter course  
   ~ to ... degrees (- at ... UTC). 
   ~ for next leg of track now / at ... UTC. 
 .14 We resume search in position ... . 
 .15 Crew has abandoned vessel / MV ... . 
 .16 Keep sharp lookout for lifeboats / liferafts / persons in water / ... . 
 
.4  Finishing with SAR operations  
 
 .1 What is the result of search?  
 .1.1  The result of  search is negative. 
 .2 Sighted  
   ~ vessel in position ... . 
   ~ lifeboats / life rafts in position ... . 
   ~ persons in water / ...  in position ... . 
 .3 Continue search in position ... .  
 .4 Can you pick up survi vors? 
 .4.1  Yes, I can pick up survivors. 
 .4.2  No, I cannot pick up survivors. 
 .5 MV ... / I will proceed to pick up survivors. 
 .5.1  Stand by lifeboats / liferafts. 
 .6 Picked up  
   ~  ... survivors in position ... . 
   ~  ... lifeboats / liferafts (with ... persons / casualties) in position ... . 
   ~  ... persons / casualties in lifejackets in position ... .  
   ~  ...  in position ... . 
 .7 Survivors  in bad / good condition.  
 .8 Do you require medical assistance? 
 .8.1  Yes, I require medical assis tance. 
 .8.2   No, I do not require  medical assistance.  
 .9 Try to obtain  information from survivors. 
 .10 There are  
   ~ still ... lifeboats / liferafts with survivors. 
   ~ no more lifeboats / liferafts. 
 .11 Total number of persons on board was ... . 
 .12 All persons / ... persons rescued.  
 .13 You / MV ...  may stop search and proceed with voyage. 
 .14 There is no hope to rescue more persons. 
 .15 We finish with SAR operations. 
 
   
Resolution A.918(22) 
Adopted on 29 November 2001  (Agenda item 9) 
IMO STANDARD MARINE COMMUNICATION PHRASES
A 22/Res.918  - 36 - 
 
 
I:\ASSEMBLY\22 \RES\918.doc A1/1.3   Requesting medical assistance  
 
 . 1 I require / MV ... requ ires medical assistance. 
 . 2 What kind of assistance is required?  
 . 2.1  I require / MV ... requires  
    ~  boat for hospital transfer. 
    ~  radio medical advice. 
    ~  helicopter with doctor (to pick up person(s)). 
 . 3 I / MV ... will  
   ~ send boat. 
   ~ send helicopter with doctor  
   ~ send helicopter to pick up person(s). 
   ~ arrange for radio medical advice on VHF Channel ... / frequency ... . 
 . 4 Boat / helicopter ETA at ... UTC / within ... hours. 
 . 5 Do you have doctor on board?  
 . 5.1  Yes, I have doctor on board.  
 . 5.2  No, I have no  doctor on board.  
 . 6 Can you make rendezvous in position ... ? 
 . 6.1  Yes, I can make rendezvous in position at ... UTC / within ... hours. 
 . 6.2  No, I cannot make rendezvous. 
 . 7 I / MV ... will send boat / helicopter to transfer doctor. 
 . 8 Transfer person(s) to my vessel / to MV ...  by boat / helicopter. 
 . 9 Transfer of person(s) not possible. 
 
A1/2   Urgency traffic  
   Safety of a vessel (other than distress). 
 Note: An urgency traffic always ha s to commence with stating the position of the 
calling vessel if it is not included in the DSC alert. 
 
.1  Technical failure  
 
 . 1 I am / MV ...  not under command.  
 . 2 What problems do you have / does MV ... have?  
 . 2.1  I have / MV ...  has problems w ith engine(s) / steering gear / propeller / ... . 
 . 3 I am / MV ...is manoeuvring with difficulty.  
 . 4 Keep clear of me / MV ... . 
 . 5 Navigate with caution.  
 . 6 I require / MV ... requires tug assistance / escort / ... . 
 . 7 I try / MV ... tries to proceed without assistance. 
 . 8 Stand by on VHF Channel ... / frequency ... . 
 .8.1  Standing by on VHF Channel ... / frequency ... . 
 
.2  Cargo 
 
 . 1 I have / MV has ... lost dangerous goods of IMO -Class ... in position ... . 
 . 2 Containers / barrels / d rums / bags / ... with dangerous goods  
  of IMO -Class ... adrift near position ... .  
 . 3 I am / MV ... is spilling 
   ~ dangerous goods of IMO -Class ... in position ...  
   ~ crude oil / ... in position ... . 
 . 4 I require / MV… requires oil clearance assistance - danger of pollution.  
 . 5 I am / MV ...  is dangerous source of radiation.  
 
 
Resolution A.918(22) 
Adopted on 29 November 2001  (Agenda item 9) 
IMO STANDARD MARINE COMMUNICATION PHRASES
 - 37 - A 22/Res.918 
 
 
I:\ASSEMBLY\22 \RES\918.doc  
.3  Ice damage  
 
 . 1 I have / MV ... has  damage above / below waterline. 
 . 2 What kind of assistance is required?  
 . 2.1  I require / MV ... requires 
    ~ tug ass istance. 
    ~ ice- breaker assistance / escort / ... . 
 . 3 I have / MV ... has  stability problems heavy icing.  
 . 4 Can you proceed without assistance? 
 . 4.1  Yes, I can proceed without assistance. 
 . 4.2  No, I cannot  proceed without assistance. 
 . 5 Stand by on VHF Channel ... / frequency ... . 
 . 5.1  Standing by on VHF Channel ... / frequency ... . 
 
A1/3   Safety Communications  
 
A1/3.1   Meteorological and hydrological conditions  
 
.1  Winds, storms, tropical storms, sea state  
 
 . 1 What is wind direction and force in your position / in position ... ? 
 . 1.1  Wind direction ...(cardinal points) , force Beaufort ... in my position / 
   in  position ... .  
 . 2 What wind  is expected in my position / in position ... ? 
 . 2.1  The wind in your position / in position ... is expected  
    ~ from direction... (cardinal points), force Beaufort ... . 
    ~ to increase / decrease. 
    ~ variable. 
 . 3 What is the latest gale / storm warning?  
. 3.1  The latest gale / storm warning is as follows:  
 Gale / storm warni ng. Winds  at ... UTC in area ... (met.area) from direction 
...(cardinal points) and force Beaufort ... backing/veering to ... 
(cardinal  points). 
 . 4 What is the latest tropical storm warning?  
 . 4.1  The latest tropical storm warning is as follows:  
Tropi cal storm warning at ... UTC. Hurricane... (name) / tropical cyclone / 
tornado / willy -willy / typhoon ... (name)  with central pressure of ... 
millibars / hectopascals located in position ...  Present movement... 
(cardinal points) at ... knots. Winds of ... knots within  radius of ... miles of  
centre.  Seas smooth/moderate/rough/high.  Further information on VHF 
Channel ... / frequency ... . 
 . 5 What is the atmospheric pressure in your position / in position ... ? 
. 5.1 The atmospheric pressure in your po sition / in position ... is ...  millibars/hectopascals. 
 . 6 What is the barometric change in your position / in position ... ? 
 . 6.1  The barometric change in your position / in position ...  
   is ... millibars / hectopascals per hour / within the last ... hours. 
 . 6.2  The barometer is steady / dropping (rapidly) / rising (rapidly). 
 . 7 What maximum winds are expected in the storm area? 
 . 7.1  Maximum winds of ... knots are expected  
    ~ in the storm area.  
    ~ within a radius of ... kilometres / miles of the centre.  
    ~ in the safe / dangerous semicircle. 
Resolution A.918(22) 
Adopted on 29 November 2001  (Agenda item 9) 
IMO STANDARD MARINE COMMUNICATION PHRASES
A 22/Res.918  - 38 - 
 
 
I:\ASSEMBLY\22 \RES\918.doc  .8 What is sea state in your position / in position ... ? 
.8.1 The smooth/moderate/rough/high sea/ slight/moderate/heavy swell in my 
position / in position ... is  ... metres from... (cardi nal points). 
 
 .9 Is the sea state expected to change (within the next hours)? 
 .9.1  No, the sea state is not expected to change (within the next hours). 
 .9.2  Yes, a sea / swell of ... metres from ...(cardinal points) 
    is expected (- within the next hours). 
 .10 A tsunami / an abnormal wave is expected by ... UTC. 
 
.2  Restricted visibility  
 
 . 1 What is visibility in your position / in position ... ? 
 . 1.1  Visibility in my position / in position is ... metres / nautical miles 
 . 1.2  Visibility is restricted by mist / fog / snow / dust / rain.  
 . 1.3  Visibility is increasing / decreasing / variable. 
 . 2 Is visibility expected to change in my position / in position ... (within the next hours)? 
. 2.1 No, visibility is not expected to change in your position / in position...  
   (within the next hours). 
. 2.2 Yes, visibility is expected to increase / decrease to ... metres / nautical miles 
in your position / in position ... (within the next hours). 
 . 2.3  Visibility is expected to be variable between  ... metres / nautical miles  
   in your position / in position ... (within the next hours). 
 
.3  Ice 
 
 . 1 What is the latest ice information?  
 . 1.1  Ice warning. Ice / iceberg(s) located in position ... / reported in area around ...  
 . 1.2  No ice located in position ...  / reported in area around ... . 
 . 2 What ice situation is expected in my position / area around ... ? 
 . 2.1  Ice situation is  
    ~  not expected to change in your position / area around ... . 
    ~ expected to improve / deteriorate in your position / area around ... . 
 . 2.2 Thickness of ice is expected to increase / decrease in your position / area 
around ... . 
 . 3 Navigation is dangerous in area around ... due to floating ice / pack ice / iceberg(s). 
 . 4 Navigation in area around  ... is only possible  
   ~ for high -powered vessels of strong construction . 
   ~ with ice- breaker assistance. 
 . 5 Area around ...  temporarily closed for navigation.  
 . 6 Danger of icing in area around ... . 
 
.4  Abnormal tides 
 
 . 1 The present tide  ... is metres above / below datum in position ... . 
 . 2 The tide ... is metres above/below prediction.  
 . 3 The tide is rising / falling.  
 . 4 Wait until high / low water. 
 . 5 Abnormally high / low tides are expected in position ... at about ... UTC / within ... 
hours. 
 . 6 Is the depth of water sufficient in position ... ? 
 . 6.1  Yes, the depth of water is sufficient in position ... . 
 . 6.2  No, the depth of water is not sufficient in position ... . 
 . 6.3  The depth of water is ... metres in position ... . 
Resolution A.918(22) 
Adopted on 29 November 2001  (Agenda item 9) 
IMO STANDARD MARINE COMMUNICATION PHRASES
 - 39 - A 22/Res.918 
 
 
I:\ASSEMBLY\22 \RES\918.doc  . 7 My draft ... is metres - can I enter / pass ... (charted name of place)? 
 . 7.1  Yes, you can enter / pass (charted name of place). 
 . 7.2  No, you cannot enter / pass (charted name of place)  - wait until  ... UTC. 
 . 8 The charted depth of wate r is increased / decreased by ... metres due to sea state / 
winds. 
 
A1/3.2   Navigational warnings  involving  
 
.1  Land - or seamarks  
 
  Defects 
 .1 ...( charted name of light / buoy)  in position ...  
   ~ unlit / unreliable / damaged / destroyed / off stati on / missing.  
 
  Alterations  
 .2 ... ( charted name of lightbuoy / buoy)  in position ...  
   ~  (temporarily) changed to ...(full characteristics). 
   ~ (temporarily) removed.  
   ~ (temporarily) discontinued.  
 
  New and moved  
 .3 ...( charted name of light  / buoy) ...(full characteristics)  
   ~ established in position ... . 
   ~  re-established in position ... . 
   ~ moved ... kilometres / nautical miles in ... (direction) to position ... .  
 .4 (Note: Only for major fog signal stations).   
   Fog signal ...( charted name of light / buoy)  in position ...  inoperative. 
 
.2  Drifting objects  
 
 .1 Superbuoy / mine / unlit derelict vessel / ... (number) container(s) 
  adrift in vicinity ...(position) at ...(date and time if known). 
  
.3  Electronic navigationa l aids  
 
 .1 GPS/GLONASS Satellite ...(number) unusable from ... (date and time) to ...(date and 
time).Cancel one hour after time of restoration.  
.2 LORAN station ...(name or number of master / secondary) off air from ...(date and 
time) to... (date and time ). Cancel one hour after time of restoration.  
 .3 RACON/RAMARK/ERICON ... (name of station) in position ... off air from ...(date 
and time) to... (date and time). Cancel one hour after time of restoration.  
 
.4  Seabottom characteristics, wrecks  
  Use REPORTED when position is unconfirmed, and use LOCATED when position 
has been confirmed by survey or other means  
 
 .1 Uncharted reef / rock / shoal / dangerous wreck / obstruction  
  reported / located in position ... . 
 .2 Dangerous wreck in position... marked  by ... (type)buoy ...(distance in 
kilometres/nautical miles ) ...(direction). 
Resolution A.918(22) 
Adopted on 29 November 2001  (Agenda item 9) 
IMO STANDARD MARINE COMMUNICATION PHRASES
A 22/Res.918  - 40 - 
 
 
I:\ASSEMBLY\22 \RES\918.doc  
.5  Miscellaneous  
 
.5.1   Cable, pipeline and seismic / hydrographic operations  
 
.1 Cable / pipeline operations  by ... (vessel) in vicinity / along line joining ... (positions) 
from ...(date and time)to ...(date and  time).  Wide berth requested (if requested).  
Contact via VHF Channel ...  (if requested). 
 .2 Seismic survey / hydrographic operations by ...(vessel) from ...(date and time) to... 
(date and time) in ...(position). Wide berth requested . (if requested). Contact via VHF  
  Channel ... (if requested). 
 .3 Survey vessel ...(name) towing ...(length) seismic cable along line joining / in area 
bounded by / in vicinity  ...(position) from ...(date and time) to ...(date and time).  
Wide berth requested (if requested).  Contact via VHF Channel ... (if requested). 
 .4 Hazardous operations by  ...(vessel) in area bounded by / in vicinity ... (position) from 
... (date and time) to ...(date and time).  Wide berth requested (if requested).  Contact 
via VHF Channel ... (if requested).  
 .5 Current meters / hydrographic instruments moored in ...(position). Wide berth 
requested (if requested). 
 
.5.2   Diving, towing and dredging operations  
 
.1 Diving/dredging operations by vessel ... (name) from ...(date and time)  to ...(date and 
time)  
  in position ... . Wide berth requested (if requested). 
 .2 Difficult tow from ...(port of departure)on ... (date) to ...(destination)on ...(date). 
Wide berth requested.  
 
.5.3  Tanker transhipment 
 
 .1 Transhipment of ...(kind of cargo)  in position... . Wide berth requested.  
 .2 I am / MT ...  spilling oil / chemicals /... in position....Wide berth  requested.  
 .3 I am / LNG -tanker/LPG -tanker ... leaking gas in position..  Avoid passing to leeward.  
 .4 Oil clearance operations near MT ... in position ... . Wide berth requested.  
 
.5.4   Off-shore installations, rig moves  
 
 .1 Platform ...(name/number if available) reported / established in position... at ... 
(dateand time).Wide berth requested (if requested). 
 .2 Platform ...(name/number if available) removed from ...(position) on ... (date). 
 .3 Pipeline / platform ...(name/number if available) in position ...  spilling oil / leaking 
gas. Wide berth requested.  
 .4 Derelict platform ...(name/number if avai lable) being removed from ...(position) at ... 
(date and time).Wide berth requested.  
 
.5.5  Defective locks or bridges  
 
 .1 Lock ...(name) defective. 
 .1.1  For entering ...(charted name of place) use lock ...(name). 
 .2 Lock / bridge ... (name) defective. 
 .2.1  Avoid this area - no possibility for vessels to turn.  
Resolution A.918(22) 
Adopted on 29 November 2001  (Agenda item 9) 
IMO STANDARD MARINE COMMUNICATION PHRASES
 - 41 - A 22/Res.918 
 
 
I:\ASSEMBLY\22 \RES\918.doc  
.5.6   Military operations  
 
 .1 Gunnery / rocket firing / missile / torpedo / underwater ordnance exercises in area 
bounded by ... (positions) from ... (date and time) to... (date and time). W ide berth 
requested (if requested). 
 .2 Mine clearing operations from ...(date time) to ...(date and time) in area bounded  
  by ...(positions).Wide berth requested.  Contact via VHF channel ...(number) 
  (if requested). 
 
.5.7  Fishery 
 
 .1 Small fishing b oats in area around ... Navigate with caution.  
 .2 Is fishing gear ahead of me? 
 .2.1  No fishing gear ahead of you.  
 .2.2  Yes, fishing gear with buoys / without buoys in position .../ area around ...  
   Navigate with caution.  
 .3 Fishing gear has fouled  my propeller(s). 
 .4 You have caught my fishing gear. 
 .5 Advise you to recover your fishing gear. 
 .6 Fishing in area ...  prohibited.  
 
A1/3.3   Environmental protection communications  
 
 .1 Located oil spill in position ... extending ... (length and widt h in metres) 
 to ... (cardinal  points). 
 .2 Located oil spill  
   ~ in your wake. 
   ~ in the wake of MV ... . 
 .3 I have / MV ... has accidental spillage of oil / ... . 
 .4 Can you / MV ... stop spillage? 
 .4.1  Yes, I  / MV ... can stop spillage. 
 .4.2  No, I / MV ... cannot stop spillage. 
 .5 What kind of assistance is required?  
 .5.1  I require / MV ... requires  
    ~ oil clearance assistance. 
    ~ floating booms / oil dispersants / ... . 
 .5 Stay in vicinity of pollution and co -operate with oil clearance team.  
 .6 ... (number) barrels / drums / containers with IMDG Code marks reported adrift  
   near position..... . 
 .7 Located a vessel dumping chemicals / waste / ... in position ... . 
 .7.1  Located a vessel incinerating chemicals / waste / ... in pos ition ... . 
 .8 Can you identify the polluter? 
 .8.1  Yes, I can identify the polluter - polluter is MV ... . 
 .8.2  No, I cannot identify the polluter. 
 .9 What is course and speed of the polluter? 
 .9.1  Course of the polluter ... degrees, speed ... knots. 
 .9.2  The polluter left the scene.  
 
Resolution A.918(22) 
Adopted on 29 November 2001  (Agenda item 9) 
IMO STANDARD MARINE COMMUNICATION PHRASES
A 22/Res.918  - 42 - 
 
 
I:\ASSEMBLY\22 \RES\918.doc  
A1/4   Pilotage  
 
A1/4.1   Pilot request  
  See AI/6 - .4.3 “Pilot request”  
  
A1/4.2   Embarking / disembarking pilot 
 
 .1 Stand by pilot ladder. 
 .2 Rig the  pilot ladder on port side / starboard side/leeside ... metres above  water. 
 .3 The pilot ladder is  rigged on port side / starboard side. 
 .4 You must rig another pilot ladder 
 .5 The pilot ladder is unsafe. 
 .6 What is wrong with the pilot ladder? 
 .7.1  The pilot ladder  
    ~ has broken / loose steps. 
    ~ has broken spreaders. 
    ~ has spreaders too short. 
    ~ is too far aft / forward.  
 .8 Move the pilot ladder 
   ~  ... metres aft / forward.  
   ~ clear of discharge. 
 .9 Rig the accommodation ladder in combination with the pilot ladder.  
 .10 Rig the pilot ladder alongside hoist. 
 .11 Put lights on at the pilot ladder. 
 .12 Man ropes are  required / not required.  
 .13 Have a heaving line ready at the pilot ladder. 
 .14 Correct the list of the vessel.  
 .15 Make a lee on your port side / starboard side.  
 .16 Steer ... degrees to make a lee. 
 .17 Keep the sea on your port quarter / starboard quarter. 
 .18 Make a boarding speed of ... knots. 
 .19 Stop engine(s) until pilot boat is clear. 
 .20 Put helm hard to port / starboard.  
 .21 Alter course to … (cardinal poi nts) - the pilot boat cannot clear the vessel.  
 .22 Put engine(s) ahead / astern.  
 .23 Embarkation is not possible. 
 .23.1   Boarding arrangements do not comply with SOLAS Regulations. 
 .23.2   Vessel is not suited for the pilot ladder. 
 
A1/4.3   Tug request  
 
 .1 Must I take tug(s)? 
 .1.1  Yes, you must take ... tug(s). 
 .1.2  No, you need not take tug(s). 
 .2 How many tugs must I take? 
 .2.1  You must take ... tug(s) according to Port Regulations. 
 .2.2  You must take ... tug(s) fore and ... tug(s) aft. 
 .3 I require ...  tug(s). 
 .4 In what position will the tug(s) meet me? 
 .4.1  The tug(s) will meet you in position  ... at ...UTC. 
 .4.2  Wait for the tug(s) in position ... . 
Resolution A.918(22) 
Adopted on 29 November 2001  (Agenda item 9) 
IMO STANDARD MARINE COMMUNICATION PHRASES
 - 43 - A 22/Res.918 
 
 
I:\ASSEMBLY\22 \RES\918.doc  .5 Must I use the towing  lines of my vessel?  
 .5.1  Yes, you must use the towing lines. 
 .5.2  No, you must use the towing  lines of the tug.    
  
A1/5   Specials  
 
A1/5.1   Helicopter operations  
  (H:  =  from helicopter V:  =  from vessel )  
   
 .1 V:  I require a helicopter. 
   ~ to pick up persons. 
   ~ with doctor. 
   ~ with liferaft / ... . 
 .1.1  MRCC: I will send a helicopter with ... . 
 .2 H:  MV ... , I will drop ... . 
 .3 H:  MV ... , are you ready for the helicopter? 
 .3.1  V:  Yes, I am ready for the helicopter. 
 .3.2  V:  No, I am not ready for the helicopter (yet). 
 .3.3  V:  Ready for the helicopter in ... minutes.       
 .4 H:  MV ... , helicopter is on the way to you.  
 .5 H:  MV ... , what is your position?  
 .5.1  V:  My position is ... . 
 .6 H:  MV ... , what is your present course and speed?  
 .6.1  V:  My present course is ... degrees, speed is ... knots. 
 .7 H:  MV ... , make identification signals. 
 .8  V: I am making identification signals by smoke (buoy) / search light /  
              flags / signalling lamp / ... . 
 .9 H:  MV ... , you are identified.  
 .10 H:  MV ... , what is the relative wind direction in degrees and knots? 
 .10.1   V: The relative wind direction is ... degrees and ... knots. 
 .11 H:  MV ... , keep the wind on port / starboard bow. 
 .12 H:  MV ... , keep the wind on port / starboard quarter. 
 .13 H:  MV ... , indicate the landing / pick -up area. 
 .13.1   V: The landing / pick -up area is ... . 
 .14 H:  MV ... , can I land on deck?  
 .14.1   V:  Yes, you can land on deck.  
 .14.2   V:  No, you cannot land on deck (yet). 
 .14.3   V:  You can land on deck in ... minutes. 
 .15 H:  MV ... , I will use hoist / rescue sling / rescue basket / rescue net / 
   rescue litter / rescue seat / double lift. 
 .16 V:  I am ready to receive you.  
 .17 H:  MV ... , I am landing.  
 .18 H:  MV ... , I am starting operation.  
 .19 H:  MV ... , do not fix the hoist cable. 
 .20 H:  MV ... , operation finished.  
 .21 H:  MV ... , I am taking off. 
 
Resolution A.918(22) 
Adopted on 29 November 2001  (Agenda item 9) 
IMO STANDARD MARINE COMMUNICATION PHRASES
A 22/Res.918  - 44 - 
 
 
I:\ASSEMBLY\22 \RES\918.doc  
A1/5.2   Ice - breaker operations  
 
.1  Ice - breaker request  
 
 .1 I am / MV is ... fast in ice in position ... . 
 .2 I require / MV ... requi res  ice-breaker assistance to reach ... . 
 .3 Ice-breaker assistance  
   ~ will arrive at ... UTC / within ... hours. 
   ~ is not available until ... UTC. 
   ~ is available only up to latitude... longitude.... 
   ~ is suspended until...(date and  time). 
   ~ is suspended after sunset. 
   ~ is suspended until favourable weather conditions. 
   ~ will be resumed at ... UTC. 
 
.2  Ice - breaker assistance for convoy  
 
 Ice-breaker commands applying to all the vessels in a convoy have to be immediately 
confirmed consecutively by each vessel in turn and executed according to the pattern given in 
GENERAL 4.6.  Ice-breaker commands applying to a single vessel are confirmed and 
executed only by that vessel, and this applies also to close-coupled towing.  When being 
assisted by an ice-breaker it is important to maintain a continuous listening watch on the 
appropriate  VHF Channel and to maintain a proper lookout for sound and visual signals. 
 
 .1 Ice-breaker assistance for convoy will start now / at ... UTC. 
 .2 Your pla ce in convoy  is number ... .  
 .3 MV ... will follow you.  
 .4 You will follow MV ... . 
 .5 Go ahead and follow me. 
 .5.1  Do not follow me. 
 .6 Proceed along the ice channel.  
 .7 Increase / reduce your speed.  
 .8 Reverse your engines. 
 .9 Stop engines. 
 .10 Keep a distance of ... metres  /cables between vessels. 
 .11 Increase / reduce the distance between vessels to ... metres / cables. 
 .12 Stand by for receiving towing line. 
 .12.1   Stand by for letting go towing line. 
 .13 Switch on the bow / stern search light. 
 .14 Stop in present position.  
 .15 Ice-breaker ... will escort you.  
 .16 Ice-breaker assistance for convoy  finished.  
 .16.1   Open water / light ice conditions ahead.  
 .17 Proceed by yourself (to area ...). 
  
Resolution A.918(22) 
Adopted on 29 November 2001  (Agenda item 9) 
IMO STANDARD MARINE COMMUNICATION PHRASES
 - 45 - A 22/Res.918 
 
 
I:\ASSEMBLY\22 \RES\918.doc  
.3  Ice - breaker assistance in close -coupled towing  
 
 .1 Stand by for close-coupled towing.  
 .2 Slack out your anchors under the hawse-pipes. 
 .3 Pass heaving lines through the hawse- pipes. 
 .4 Receive towing line on deck.  
 .5 Lash together the eyes of the towing line with manila lashing.  
 .6 Fasten towing line on your bitts. 
 .7 I start to draw your bow into the stern notch of the ice-breaker. 
 .8 Stand by for cutting the manila lashing if required.  
 .9 Keep yourself in the centre- plane of the ice-breaker. 
  
A1/6   Vessel Traffic Service  (VTS) Standard Phrases  
 
              Application of Message Markers  
 
In order to especially facilitate shore- to-ship and ship- to-shore communication or when one of the 
IMO Standard Marine Communication Phrases will not fit the meaning desired, one of the following 
eight  message markers may be used to increase the probability of the purpose of the message being 
properly understood.  
 
It is at the discretion of the shore personnel or the ship’s officer whether to use one of the message 
markers and if so which  of them to apply depending on the user’s qualified assessment of the 
situation.  If used, the message marker is to be spoken preceding the message or the corresponding 
part of the message.  The IMO VTS Guidelines recommend that in any message directed to a vessel it 
should be clear whether the message contains information, advice, warning , or instruction  and 
IMO Standard Marine Communication Phrases should be used where practicable. 
 
For further standardized VTS communications, also see other sections of Part A1.  For VTS Standard 
Reporting Procedures, see IMO resolution A.851(20) on General Principles for Ship Reporting 
Systems and Ship Reporting Requirements, including guidelines for reporting incidents involving 
dangerous goods, harmful substances and / or marine pollutants. 
 
Note:  All of the following phrases must come as the culmination (message content) of a radio 
message exchange between stations covered by the ITU Radio Regulations, and the relevant 
calling procedures have to be observed.  
 
 
Resolution A.918(22) 
Adopted on 29 November 2001  (Agenda item 9) 
IMO STANDARD MARINE COMMUNICATION PHRASES
A 22/Res.918  - 46 - 
 
 
I:\ASSEMBLY\22 \RES\918.doc Message  Markers  
 
 (i)  INSTRUCTION 
 
This indicates that the following message implies the intention of the sender to influence others 
by a Regulation.  
 
Comment:   This means that the sender, e.g. a VTS Station or a naval vessel, must have full 
authority to send such a message.  The recipient has to follow this legally binding 
message unless he/she has contradictory safety reasons which then have to be 
reported to the sender. 
 
Example:   "INSTRUCTION. Do not cross the fairway.” 
 
 (ii)  ADVICE  
 
This indicates tha t the following message implies the intention of the sender to influence others 
by a Recommendation.  
 
Comment:   The decision whether to follow the ADVICE still stays with the recipient. ADVICE 
does not necessarily have to be followed but should be conside red very carefully.  
 
Example:   "ADVICE. (Advise you) stand by on VHF Channel six nine."  
 
(iii)   WARNING  
 
This indicates that the following message implies the intention of the sender to inform others about 
danger. 
 
Comment:   This means that any recip ient of a WARNING should pay immediate attention to  
    the danger mentioned. Consequences of a WARNING will be up to the recipient. 
 
Example:    "WARNING. Obstruction in the fairway."  
 
 (iv)   INFORMATION 
 
This indicates that the following message is restricted to observed facts, situations, etc.. 
 
Comment:   This marker is preferably used for navigational and traffic information, etc.. 
    Consequences of INFORMATION will be up to the recipient. 
 
Example:   "INFORMATION. MV Noname will overtake to the west of you  ."  
 
 (v)  QUESTION 
 
This indicates that the following message is of an interrogative character. 
 
Comment:   The use of this marker removes any doubt as to whether a question is being asked or a 
statement is being made, especially when interrogatives such as what, where, why, 
who, how are additionally used at the beginning of the question.  The recipient is 
expected to return an answer. 
 
Example:   "QUESTION.(What is) your present maximum draft?"  
 
 
Resolution A.918(22) 
Adopted on 29 November 2001  (Agenda item 9) 
IMO STANDARD MARINE COMMUNICATION PHRASES
 - 47 - A 22/Res.918 
 
 
I:\ASSEMBLY\22 \RES\918.doc  (vi)   ANSWER 
 
This indicates that the following message is the reply to a previous question.  
 
Comment:    Note that an answer should not contain another question.  
 
Example:   "ANSWER. My present maximum draft is zero seven metres."  
 
 (vii)  REQUEST 
 
This indicates that the following messa ge is asking for action from others with respect to the vessel.  
 
Comment:   The use of this marker is to signal: I want something to be arranged or provided,  
    e.g. ship´s stores requirements, tugs, permission, etc.. 
 
Note:    REQUEST must not be used involving navigation, or to modify COLREGS.  
 
Example:   "REQUEST. I require two tugs."  
 
 (viii)   INTENTION 
 
This indicates that the following message informs others about immediate navigational action 
intended to be taken.  
 
Comment:   The use of thi s message marker is logically restricted to messages announcing  
    navigational actions by the vessel sending this message. 
 
Example:   "INTENTION. I will reduce my speed."  
 
 
A1/6.1   Phrases for acquiring and providing data for a traffic image  
 
.1   Acquiring and providing routine traffic data  
 
.1  What is the name of your vessel and call sign / identification?  
.1.1   The name of my vessel is ... , call sign ... / identification ...  . 
.1.2   Spell the name of your vessel.  
.2  What is your flag Stat e? 
.2.1   My flag State is ... . 
.3  What is your position?  
.3.1   My position is ... . 
.4  What is your present course and speed?  
.4.1   My present course is ... degrees, my speed is ... knots. 
.5  From what direction are you approaching?  
.5.1   I am approaching from ... . 
.6  What is your port of destination / destination?  
.6.1   My port of destination / destination is ... . 
.7  What was your last port of call?  
.7.1   My last port of call was ... . 
.8  What is your ETA in position ... ? 
.8.1   My ETA is ...  UTC. 
.9  What is your ETD from ... ? 
.9.1   My ETD from ... is  ...  UTC. 
 
Resolution A.918(22) 
Adopted on 29 November 2001  (Agenda item 9) 
IMO STANDARD MARINE COMMUNICATION PHRASES
A 22/Res.918  - 48 - 
 
 
I:\ASSEMBLY\22 \RES\918.doc .10  What is your draft forward / aft?  
.10.1   My draft forward / aft is  ... metres. 
.11  What is your present maximum draft ? 
.11.1   My present maximum draft is  ... metres. 
.12  What is your freeboard?  
.12.1   My freeboard is ... metres. 
.13  What is your air draft?  
.13.1   My air draft is ... metres. 
.14  Are you underway?  
.14.1   Yes, I am underway.  
.14.2   No, I am not underway.    
.14.3   I am ready to get underway.  
.15  What is your full speed / full manoeuvring speed?  
.15.1   My full speed / full manoeuvring speed is ... knots. 
.16  What is your cargo?  
.16.1   My cargo is ... . 
.17  Do you carry any dangerous goods? 
.17.1   Yes, I carry the  followi ng dangerous goods:  ... kilograms / tonnes IMO Class ... . 
.17.2   No, I do not carry any dangerous goods. 
.18  Do you have any deficiencies / restrictions? 
.18.1   No, I have no deficiencies / restrictions. 
.18.2   Yes, I have the following deficiencies / restrictions: ... . 
.19  I am / MV ...  is constrained by draft. 
.20  The maximum permitted draft is  ... metres. 
.21  Do you have any list?  
.21.1   Yes, I have a list to port / starboard of ... degrees. 
.21.2   No, I have no list. 
.22  Are you on even keel?  
.22.1   Yes, I am on even keel.  
.22.2   No, I am trimmed by the head / stern.  
 
.2   Acquiring and providing distress traffic data  
   See A1/1.1 “Distress communications”. 
 
A1/6.2   Phrases for providing VTS services  
 
.1  Information service  
             These phrases are normally transmitted from the shore. 
 
.1.1  Navigational warnings  
 
.1  Unknown object(s) in position ... . 
.2  Ice / iceberg(s) in position ... / area around ... . 
.3  Unlit derelict vessel adrift in vicinity ... at ... (date  and time). 
.4  Dangerous wreck / obstruction located in position ... marked by ... (type) buoy.  
.5  Hazardous mine adrift in vicinity ... at ... (date and time). 
.6  Uncharted reef / rock / shoal reported in position ... . 
.7  Pipeline is leaking gas / oil in position ... Wide berth requested.  
.8  Depth of water not sufficient in position ... . 
.9  Navigation closed in area ... . 
 
Resolution A.918(22) 
Adopted on 29 November 2001  (Agenda item 9) 
IMO STANDARD MARINE COMMUNICATION PHRASES
 - 49 - A 22/Res.918 
 
 
I:\ASSEMBLY\22 \RES\918.doc .1.2  Navigational information  
 
.1  Oil spill in position ... . 
.2  Current meters / hydrographic instruments moored in position ...Wide berth requested.  
.3  Platform ...(name / number) reported / established in position ...Wide berth requested.  
.4  ...(charted name of light / buoy) in position ...  
      ~ unlit / unreliable / damaged / destroyed / off station / miss ing.  
     ~ (temporarily) changed to ...(full characteristics). 
      ~ (temporarily) removed.  
     ~ (temporarily) discontinued.  
.5  ...(charted name of light / buoy) ... (full characteristics). 
      ~ established in position ... . 
      ~ re-established in position ... . 
      ~ moved ... kilometres / nautical miles in ... (direction) to position ... . 
.6  (Note: Only for major fog signal stations). 
  Fog signal ...(charted name of light / buoy) in position ...  inoperative. 
 
.1.3  Traffic information  
 
.1  Gunnery / rocket firing / missile / torpedo / underwater ordnance exercises in area bounded by 
...(positions) and ... from ... (date and time) to ... (date and time).  Wide berth requested.  
.2  Cable / pipeline operations by... (vessel) in vicinity ... / along a line joining ...(position) from 
... (date and time) to... (date and time ).  Wide berth requested. Contact via VHF Channel ...  
.3  Salvage operations in position ... from ... (date and time) to ... (date and time). 
  Wide berth reque sted. Contact via VHF Channel ... . 
.4   Seismic / hydrographic operations by  ... (vessel)... from ... (date and time) 
   to ...(date and    time) in position ... Wide berth requested.  
   Contact via VHF Channel ... . 
.5  Oil clearance operations near MT ... in position ... Wide berth requested.  
.6  Transhipment of ...(kind of cargo) in position ... Wide berth requested.  
.7  Difficult tow from ...(port of departure) to ...(destination) on ...(date). 
  Wide berth requested.  
.8  Vessel not under command in position ... / area ... . 
.9  Hampered vessel in position ... area ... (course ... degrees, speed ...  knots). 
.9.1   Vessel constrained by her draft in position … area … (course … degrees … speed … 
knots) 
.10  Vessel in position ... on course ... and speed ... is not complying with traffic regulations. 
.11  Vessel is crossing ... traffic lane on course ... and speed ... in position ... . 
.12  Small fishing boats in area around ... Navigate with caution.  
.13  Submarines operating in sea area around ... Surface vessels are in attendance. 
 
.1.4  Route information  
 
.1 Route .../ Traffic  Lane ... has been suspended / discontinued / diverted.  
 
.1.5  Hydrographic information  
 
.1  Tidal prediction for ... (name of station(s)) / area ... :  
.1.1   A tide of ... metres above / below datum is expected in position ... / area ...  
   at about ... UTC. 
.1.2   Abnormally high / low tides are expected in position ... / area ... at about ... UTC. 
.2  The tide is rising:  
   ~ it is ... hours before high  water / after low water. 
   ~ it is ... metres below high water / above low water. 
 
Resolution A.918(22) 
Adopted on 29 November 2001  (Agenda item 9) 
IMO STANDARD MARINE COMMUNICATION PHRASES
A 22/Res.918  - 50 - 
 
 
I:\ASSEMBLY\22 \RES\918.doc .3  The tide is falling:  
   ~ it is ... hours after high water / before low water. 
   ~ it is ... metres below high water / above low water. 
.4  The tide is slack.  
.5  Present tide is ...  metres above / below datum ... in position ... .. 
.6  The tide is ... metres above / below prediction.  
.7  The tidal stream / current is ... knots in position ... . 
.8  The tide is setting in direction ... degrees. 
.9  The depth  of water is / is not sufficient in position ... . 
.12  Charted depth has increased / decreased by ... metres due to winds / sea state. 
 
.1.6  Electronic navigational aids information  
 
.1  GPS Satellite ...(number) unusable from ...(date and time) to ...  (date and time).  
  Cancel one hour after time of restoration.  
.2  LORAN station ...(name number of master / secondary )  
.3  RACON ... (name of station) in position ... off air ... from ... (date and time)  
  to ...  (date and time). 
 
.1.7  Meteo rological warnings  
 
.1  Gale warning / storm warning was issued at ... UTC starting at ... UTC . 
.1.1   Gale warning / storm warning. Wind at ... UTC in area ... (met. area) from direction  
   ... (cardinal points) and force Beaufort ... backing / veering to ... (cardinal points). 
.2  Tropical storm warning was issued at ... UTC starting at ... UTC. 
.2.1   Tropical storm warning at ... UTC. Hurricane ... (name) / tropical cyclone / tornado / 
   willy -willy / typhoon / ... with central pressure of ... mi llibars/hectopascals located in 
position ... . 
   Present movement ... (cardinal points) at ... knots. Winds of ... knots within radius  
   of ... nautical miles of centre. Seas over ... metres.  
   Further information on VHF Channel ... / frequency ... (at ... UTC). 
 
.1.8  Meteorological information  
 
.1  Position of tropical storm ... (name) ..., path  ... (cardinal points),  
  speed of advance ... knots. 
.2  Wind direction ...(cardinal points), force Beaufort ... in position ... . 
.3  Wind is backi ng / veering and increasing / decreasing.  
.4  Wind is expected to increase / decrease in position ... to force Beaufort ...   
  within the next... hours. 
.5  Visibility in position ...    
   ~ ... metres / nautical miles. 
   ~ reduced by mist / fog / snow / dust / rain / ... . 
   ~ expected to increase / decrease to ... metres / nautical miles  
      within the next ...  hours. 
.6  Sea / swell in position ...  
   ~ ... metres from ...(cardinal points). 
   ~  expected to increase / decrease within the  next ... hours. 
.7  Icing is expected / not expected  in area ... . 
 
.1.9  Meteorological questions and answers  
  See A1/3.1 “Meteorological and hydrological conditions” 
 
 
Resolution A.918(22) 
Adopted on 29 November 2001  (Agenda item 9) 
IMO STANDARD MARINE COMMUNICATION PHRASES
 - 51 - A 22/Res.918 
 
 
I:\ASSEMBLY\22 \RES\918.doc .2  Navigational assistance service  
 Shore based pilotage by navigational assistance service: see also A1/6.4 .3.18 to .3.21  
 
.2.1  Request  and identification  
 
.1  Is shore based radar assistance available? 
.1.1  Yes, shore based radar assistance is available. 
.1.2   No, shore based radar assistance is not available. 
.2  Shore based radar assistance is available from ... to ... UTC.  
.3  Do you require navigational assistance to reach ... ? 
.3.1   Yes, I require navigational assistance. 
.3.2    No, I do not require   navigational assistance. 
.4  What is your position?  
.4.1   My position is bearing ... degrees ..., distance ... kilometres / nautical miles from ... . 
.5  How was your position obtained?  
.5.1   My position was obtained by GPS / RADAR / cross- bearing /  
  astronomical observation / ...  
.6  Repeat your po sition for identification.  
.7  I have located you on my radar screen.  
.7.1 Your position is bearing  ... degrees, distance ... kilometres / nautical miles from ... . 
.8  I cannot locate you on my radar screen.  
.9  What is your present course and speed?  
.9.1   My present course is  ... degrees, my speed is ... knots. 
.10  What is the course to reach you?  
.10.1   The course to reach me is  ... degrees. 
.11  Is your radar in operation?  
.11.1   Yes, my radar is in operation.  
.11.2   No, my radar is  not i n operation.  
.12  What range scale are you using?  
.12.1   I am using ... miles range scale. 
.12.2   Change to a larger / smaller range scale. 
.13  You are leaving my radar screen.  
.14  Change to radar ... (name) VHF Channel ... . 
.15  I have lost radar contact.  
 
.2.2  Position  
 
.1  You are entering ... . 
.2  Your position is  .../ bearing ... degrees, distance ... kilometres / nautical miles from ... . 
.4  You are passing ... . 
  You are  
   ~ in the centre of the fairway.  
   ~ on / not on the  radar reference line (of the fairway). 
   ~ on the  ... (cardinal points) side of the fairway.  
.5  You are approaching the  ... (cardinal points) limit of the fairway.  
.6  Your position is  buoy number ... distance ... metres / cables  
   to the  ... (cardinal points) of the radar reference line. 
.7  Your position is distance ... metres / cables from the intersection of radar reference line ...  
  and radar reference line ... and distance ... metres / cables to the   ... (cardinal points)  
  of radar reference line ... . 
.8  MV ... has reported at reporting point ... . 
.9  You are getting closer to the vessel …  (cardinal points) of you.  
.10  Vessel on opposite course is passing to the  ... (cardinal points) of you.  
 
Resolution A.918(22) 
Adopted on 29 November 2001  (Agenda item 9) 
IMO STANDARD MARINE COMMUNICATION PHRASES
A 22/Res.918  - 52 - 
 
 
I:\ASSEMBLY\22 \RES\918.doc .11  MV ... is  metres / cables ... (cardinal points) of you.  
   ~ is ingoing / outgoing.  
  ~ has stopped.  
   ~ is at anchor. 
   ~ is on a reciprocal course. 
   ~ will overtake to the  ... (cardinal points) of you.  
.12  Vessel has anchored ... metres / cables ... (cardinal points) of yo u in position ... . 
.13  Vessel ... (cardinal points) of you is obstructing your movements. 
.14  You will meet crossing traffic in position ... . 
.15  Vessel is entering / leaving the fairway at ... . 
.16  Buoy ... distance ... metres / cables ... (cardinal points). 
.17  Vessel ... (cardinal points) of you is  
   ~ turning.  
   ~ anchoring.  
   ~ increasing / decreasing speed.  
   ~ overtaking you.  
   ~ not under command.  
 
.2.3  Course 
  Note:  the user of this phrase should be fully aware of the implications of words such  
  as "track", "heading" and "course made good".  
 
.1  Your track is  
   ~ parallel with the reference line. 
   ~ diverging from the reference line. 
   ~ converging to the reference line. 
.2  What is your present course / headin g? 
.2.1   My present course / heading is  ... degrees. 
.3  You are steering a dangerous course. 
.4  Course to make good is ... degrees. 
.5  Vessel ... (cardinal points) of you is on same course ... degrees. 
.5.1   Advise you 
  ~ Keep your present cou rse. 
   ~ A new course of  … degrees. 
.6  Have you altered course? 
.6.1   Yes, I have altered course - my new course is  ... degrees. 
.6.2   No, I have not altered course - my course is  ... degrees. 
.7  You are running into danger - 
   ~ shallow wat er ... (cardinal points) of you.  
   ~ submerged wreck ... (cardinal points) of you.  
   ~ fog bank ... (cardinal points) of you.  
   ~ risk of collision (with a vessel bearing ... degrees, distance ... kilometres / 
      nautical miles). 
   ~ bridge is defective / ... . 
 
.3  Traffic organization service  
 
.3.1  Clearance, forward planning  
 
.1  Traffic clearance is required before entering ...  . 
.2  Do not enter the traffic lane / ... . 
.3  Proceed to the emergency anchorage. 
.4  Keep clear of .../  avoid ... . 
 
Resolution A.918(22) 
Adopted on 29 November 2001  (Agenda item 9) 
IMO STANDARD MARINE COMMUNICATION PHRASES
 - 53 - A 22/Res.918 
 
 
I:\ASSEMBLY\22 \RES\918.doc  
.5  You have permission  
   ~ to enter the traffic lane / route - traffic clearance  granted.  
   ~ to enter traffic lane / route in position ... at ... UTC. 
.6  Do not pass the  reporting point ... until ... UTC. 
.7  Report at the next wa ypoint / waypoint ... / at ... UTC. 
.8  You must arrive at way point ... at ... UTC - your berth is clear. 
.9  Do not arrive in position ... before / after ... UTC. 
.10  The tide is  with you / against you.  
 
.3.2  Anchoring  
 
.1  You must anchor  
   ~ at ... UTC. 
   ~ until the pilot arrives. 
   ~ in a different position.  
   ~ clear of fairway.  
.2  Do not anchor in position ... . 
.3  Anchoring is prohibited.  
.6  You must heave up anchor. 
.7  You are at anchor in a wrong position.  
.8  Have your crew on stand by for heaving up  anchor when the pilot embarks. 
.9  You have permission to anchor (at ... UTC) 
   ~ in position ... . 
   ~ until the pilot arrives. 
   ~ until the tugs arrive. 
   ~ until  sufficient water. 
.10  You are obstructing the  fairway / other traffic. 
.11  Are you dragging / dredging anchor? 
.11.1   Yes, I am dragging / dredging anchor. 
.11.2   No, I am not dragging / dredging anchor. 
.12  Do not dredge anchor. 
 
.3.3  Arrival, berthing and departure  
 
.1  Your orders are to berth on ... . 
.2  Your orders are changed to proceed to ... .  
.3  Proceed to ... for orders. 
.4  You have permission to enter / to proceed at ... UTC. 
.5  Vessel is turning / manoeuvring in position ... . 
.6  MV ...  
   ~ will turn in position ... . 
   ~ will leave ... at ... UTC. 
   ~ is leaving ... . 
   ~ has left ... . 
    ~ entered fairway in position ... . 
.7  Your berth is not clear (until ... UTC)  
.7.1   Your berth will be clear at ... UTC. 
.8  You will berth / dock at ... UTC . 
.9  Berthing has been delayed by ... hours. 
.10  Be ready to get underway.  
.10.1   I am ready to get underway  
.11  Get underway.  
 
Resolution A.918(22) 
Adopted on 29 November 2001  (Agenda item 9) 
IMO STANDARD MARINE COMMUNICATION PHRASES
A 22/Res.918  - 54 - 
 
 
I:\ASSEMBLY\22 \RES\918.doc .12  Are you underway?  
.12.1   Yes, I am underway.  
.12.2   No, I am not underway.  
.13  Move ahead / astern ... metres. 
.14  Your vessel is in position - make fast. 
 
.3.4  Enforcement 
 
.1  According to my radar, your course does not comply with Rule 10 of the COLREGs. 
.2  Your actions will be reported to the Authorities. 
.3  You are  
   ~ not complying with traffic regulatio ns. 
   ~ not keeping to the correct traffic lane. 
.4  Have all navigational instruments in operation before entering this area / area ... . 
.5  Your navigation lights are not visible. 
.6  Recover your fishing gear.  
.6.1   You are fishing in the fairway.  
.7  Fishing gear is to the  ... (cardinal points) of you.  
.8  Fishing in area ...is prohibited.  
.9  You are approaching a prohibited fishing area. 
.10  Fairway speed is... knots. 
 
.3.5  Avoiding dangerous situations, providing safe movements  
 
.1  It is dangerous  
   ~ to anchor in  your  present position.  
   ~ to remain in  your  present position.  
   ~ to alter course to ... (cardinal points). 
.2  Large vessel is leaving the fairway- keep clear of the  fairway approach.  
.3  Nets with buoys / without buoys in this area - navigate with caution.  
.4  Collision in position ... . 
.5  MV ... is  aground / on fire / ... in position ... . 
.6  Stand by for assistance. 
.7  Vessels must  
   ~ keep clear of this area / area ... . 
   ~ avoid this area / area ... . 
   ~ navigate with caution.  
.8  Keep clear of ... - search and rescue in progress. 
.9  Your present course is  too close 
   ~ to ingoing / outgoing vessel.  
   ~ to the vessel that you are overtaking.  
   ~ to the  ... (cardinal points) limit o f the fairway.  
.10  Your course is deviating from the radar reference line. 
.11  You are running into danger 
   ~ shallow water .... (cardinal points) of you.  
   ~ submerged wreck ... (cardinal points) of you.  
   ~ fog bank ... (cardinal points) of you.  
   ~ risk of collision (with vessel bearing ... degrees,  
      distance ... kilometres / nautical miles). 
   ~ bridge is defective. 
.12  You are proceeding at a dangerous speed.  
.13  You must 
   ~ proceed by the fairway / route ... . 
   ~ keep to  the ... (cardinal points) of the fairway line / radar reference line. 
Resolution A.918(22) 
Adopted on 29 November 2001  (Agenda item 9) 
IMO STANDARD MARINE COMMUNICATION PHRASES
 - 55 - A 22/Res.918 
 
 
I:\ASSEMBLY\22 \RES\918.doc    ~ stay clear of the fairway.  
.14  You must wait for MV ... to cross ahead of you.  
.15  You must wait for MV ... to clear ... before  
   ~ entering the fairway.  
   ~ getting unde rway.  
   ~ leaving the berth.  
.16  Do not  
   ~ overtake. 
   ~ cross the fairway.  
.17  Alter course to ...(cardinal points) of you.  
.18  Pass ... (cardinal points) of  
  ~  ingoing /outgoing / anchored / disabled vessel.  
   ~ of ... mark / ... . 
.19  Stop engines. 
.20  MV ...  
   ~ wishes to overtake …  (cardinal points) of you.     
  ~ agrees / does not agree to be overtaken.  
   ~ is approaching an obscured area ... - approaching vessels acknowledge. 
    
.3.6  Canal and lock operations  
 
.1  You must  
   ~ close up on the vessel ahead of you.  
   ~ drop back from the vessel ahead of you.  
   ~ wait at ... . 
   ~ moor at ... . 
   ~ wait for lock clearance at ... until ... UTC. 
.2  Convoy ... must wait / moor at ... . 
.3  You will  
   ~ join  convoy ... at ... UTC. 
   ~ enter  canal / lock at ... UTC. 
.4  Transit will begin at ... UTC. 
.5  Your place in convoy is number ... . 
.6  Transit / convoy speed is ... knots. 
.7  Convoys / vessels will pass in area ... . 
 
A1/6.3   Handing over to another VTS 
 
.1  ... VTS this is ... VTS: MV ... position is bearing... degrees, distance ... kilometres / nautical  
   miles from ... . working frequency is VHF Channel ... . Your target. Please confirm.  
.2  ... VTS this is ... VTS: MV ... position beari ng is ... degrees, distance ... kilometres / nautical  
miles from ... .  I confirm. My target. 
.3  .... VTS this is ... VTS: MV ... position is bearing... degrees, distance ... kilometres / nautical  
   miles from ... . I am unable to take over this targ et. 
 
A1/6.4   Phrases for communication with emergency services and allied services  
 
.1  Emergency services  (SAR, fire fighting, pollution fighting)   
  See A1/1.1 “Distress communications” 
 
.2  Tug services  
  Also see A2/3.6 “Tug assistance” 
 
 
Resolution A.918(22) 
Adopted on 29 November 2001  (Agenda item 9) 
IMO STANDARD MARINE COMMUNICATION PHRASES
A 22/Res.918  - 56 - 
 
 
I:\ASSEMBLY\22 \RES\918.doc .1  How ma ny tugs do you require? 
.1.1   I require ... tug(s). 
.2  You must take  
   ~ ... tug(s) according to port regulations. 
   ~ ... tug(s) fore and ... tug(s) aft. 
.3  Wait for the tug(s) in position ... . 
.4  The tugs will meet you in position ... at ... UTC. 
.6  Tug services have been suspended until ...(date and time) /  resumed on...(date and time). 
 
.3  Pilot request  
 
.1  Must I take a pilot?    
.1.1   Yes, you must take a pilot - pilotage is compulsory.  
.1.2   No, you need not take a pilot.  
.2  Do you require a pilot?  
.2.1   Yes, I require a pilot. 
.2.2   No, I do not require a pilot - I am holder of Pilotage Exemption Certificate (No. ...). 
.3  You are exempted from pilotage.  
.4  Do you require a pilot at ...(name) Pilot Station?  
.4.1   Yes, I require a pilot at ...(name) Pilot Station.  
.4.2   No, I do not require a pilot at ...(name) Pilot Station - I require a pilot in position ...  
.5  What is your ETA at ...(name) Pilot Station in local time? 
.5.1   My ETA at...(name) Pilot Station i s ... hours local time. 
.6  What is local time? 
.6.1   Local time is ... hours. 
.7  What is your  position?  
.7.1   My  position is ... . 
.8  What is your distance from ...(name) Pilot Station?  
.8.1   My distance from ...(name) Pilot Station is ... ki lometres / nautical miles. 
.9  Is the pilot boat on station?  
.9.1   Yes, the pilot boat is on station.  
.9.2   No, the pilot boat is  not on station.  
.9.3   The pilot boat will be on station at ... hours local time. 
.10  In what position can I take the  pilot?  
.10.1   Take the pilot at ...(Pilot Station) / near position….   
.11  When will the pilot embark?  
.11.1   The pilot will embark at ... hours local time. 
.12  The pilot boat is coming to you.  
.13  Stop in present position and wait for the pilot. 
.14  Keep the pilot boat …  (cardinal points) of you.  
.15  What is your freeboard?  
.15.1   My freeboard is  ... metres. 
.16  Change to VHF Channel ... for pilot transfer. 
.17  Stand by on VHF Channel ... until pilot transfer is completed.  
.18  Pilotag e at ...(name) Pilot Station has been suspended until ... (date and local time). 
.19  Pilotage at ...(name) Pilot Station has been resumed.  
.20  The pilot cannot embark at ... (name) Pilot Station due to ... . 
.21  Do you accept shore-based navigational  assistance from VTS Centre? 
.21.1   Yes, I accept shore-based navigational assistance. 
.21.2   No, I do not accept shore- based navigational assistance. 
.21.3   I will stay in position ... until ... . 
.22  You have permission to proceed by yourself  (or wait for the  pilot at ... buoy). 
.23  Follow the pilot boat inward where the pilot will embark.  
 
.4  Embarking / disembarking pilot 
  See A1/4.2 “Embarking/disembarking pilot”  
Resolution A.918(22) 
Adopted on 29 November 2001  (Agenda item 9) 
IMO STANDARD MARINE COMMUNICATION PHRASES
 - 57 - A 22/Res.918 
 
 
I:\ASSEMBLY\22 \RES\918.doc Appendix to A1  - External Communication Phrases  
Standard GMDSS Messages  
For further details, see ITU Manual for use by the Maritime Mobile and Maritime Mobile  
Satellite Services, Geneva. 
 
1  Standard distress message  
 
 .1  Structure  
Upon receipt of a DSC Distress Alert acknowledgement the vessel in distress should 
commence the distress traffic on one of the international distress traffic frequencies such 
as VHF Channel 16 or frequency 2182 kHz (if not automatically controlled) as follows:  
 
 MAYDAY  
 THIS IS 
- the 9- digit Maritime Mobile Service Identity code (MMSI) plus name / cal l sign  
or other identification of the vessel calling 
  - the position of the vessel  
  - the nature of distress 
  - the assistance required 
  - any other information which might facilitate rescue. 
 
 .2  Example  
  
 MAYDAY  
  - THIS IS TWO -ONE -ONE -TWO -THREE -NINE -SIX- EIGHT -ZERO  
     MOTOR VESSEL "BIRTE" CALL SIGN DELTA ALPHA MIKE KILO  
 - POSITION SIX TWO DEGREES ONE ONE DECIMAL EIGHT  
              MINUTES NORTH 
  - ZERO ZERO SEVEN DEGREES FOUR FOUR MINUTES EAST  
  - I AM ON FIRE AFTER EXPLOSION 
  - I REQUIRE FIRE FIGHTING ASSISTANCE  
  - SMOKE NOT TOXIC   OVER  
 
Standard urgency message  
 
 .1 Structure  
After the transmission of a DSC Urgency Call switch the transmitter to VHF Channel 16 or 
frequency 2182 kHz (if not automatically controlled) and commenc e the urgency traffic as 
follows:  
 
 PAN PAN  (repeated three times)  
 ALL STATIONS  (repeated three times) 
 THIS IS 
  - the 9- digit MMSI of the vessel plus name / call sign or other identification  
  - the position of the vessel  
  - the text of the urg ency message. 
Resolution A.918(22) 
Adopted on 29 November 2001  (Agenda item 9) 
IMO STANDARD MARINE COMMUNICATION PHRASES
A 22/Res.918  - 58 - 
 
 
I:\ASSEMBLY\22 \RES\918.doc  .2 Example  
   
 PAN PAN  PAN PAN  PAN PAN  
 ALL STATIONS ALL STATIONS ALL STATIONS 
 - THIS IS TWO -ONE -ONE -TWO -THREE -NINE -SIX- EIGHT -ZERO  
    MOTORVESSEL "BIRTE" CALL SIGN DELTA ALPHA MIKE KILO  
 - POSITION  SIX TWO DEGREES ONE ONE DECIMAL EIGHT MINUTES NORTH 
   ZERO ZERO SEVEN DEGREES FOUR FOUR MINUTES EAST  
 - I HAVE PROBLEMS WITH ENGINES  
 - I REQUIRE TUG ASSISTANCE  OUT 
 
Standard safety message  
 
 .1 Structure  
After the transmission of a DSC Safety Call switch the transmitter to VHF Chan nel 16 or 
frequency 2182 kHz (if not automatically controlled) and transmit the safety message as 
follows:  
 
 SÉCURITÉ  (repeated three times)  
 ALL STATIONS (or all ships in a specific geographical area, or to a specific station)  
 (repeated three times)  
 THIS IS 
  - the 9- digit MMSI of the vessel plus name / call sign or other identification  
  - the text of the safety message. 
 
 .3 Example  
  
 SÉCURITÉ   SÉCURIT É   SÉCURIT É 
 ALL SHIPS   ALL SHIPS   ALL SHIPS  IN AREA PETER REEF  
 - THIS IS  TWO -ONE -ONE-TWO -THREE -NINE -SIX- EIGHT -ZERO  
   MOTORVESSEL "BIRTE"  CALL SIGN DELTA ALPHA MIKE KILO  
 - DANGEROUS WRECK LOCATED IN POSITION TWO NAUTICAL   MILES  
   SOUTH OF PETER REEF     OVER 
 
Resolution A.918(22) 
Adopted on 29 November 2001  (Agenda item 9) 
IMO STANDARD MARINE COMMUNICATION PHRASES
 - 59 - A 22/Res.918 
 
 
I:\ASSEMBLY\22 \RES\918.doc A2 ON-BOARD COMMUNICATION PHRASES 
 
A2/1  Standard wheel orders  
All whe el orders given should be repeated by the helmsman and the officer of the watch 
should ensure that they are carried out correctly and immediately. All wheel orders should be 
held until countermanded. The helmsman should report immediately if the vessel doe s not 
answer the wheel.  
When there is concern that the helmsman is inattentive s/he should be questioned:  
"What is your heading ?"   And he/she should respond:  
"My heading is ... degrees."  
 
Order        Meaning  
 
 1. Midships        Rudder to be held in the fore and aft position.  
 2. Port / starboard five      5° of port / starboard rudder to be held.  
 3. Port / starboard ten     10°of port / starboard rudder to be held.  
 4. Port / starboard fifteen     15°of port / starboard rudder to be held.  
 5. Port / starboard twenty                     20° of port / starboard rudder to be held.  
 6. Port / starboard twenty- five   25°of port / starboard rudder to be held.  
 7. Hard -a-port / starboard    Rudder to be held fully over to port / starboard.  
 8. Nothing to port/sta rboard   Avoid allowing the vessel’s head to go to 
port/starboard  
 9. Meet her        Check the swing of the vessel´s head in a turn.  
  10. Steady        Reduce swing as rapidly as possible. 
11. Ease to five / ten      Reduce amount of rudder to 5 °/10° /15°/20° and hold.  
 / fifteen / twenty  
12. Steady as she goes      Steer a steady course on the compass heading 
indicated at the time of the order. The helmsman is to 
repeat the order and call out the compass heading on 
receiving the order. When the vessel is s teady on that 
heading, the  helmsman is to call out: "Steady on ..."  
13. Keep  the buoy/ mark/ beacon/ ...  on port side / starboard side. 
14. Report if she does not answer the wheel.  
15. Finished with wheel, no more steering.  
  
When the officer of the wat ch requires a course to be steered by compass, the direction in which  s/he 
wants the wheel turned should be stated followed by each numeral being said separately, including 
zero, for example:  
 
Order        Course to be steered  
 
Port, steer one eight two      182° 
Starboard, steer zero eight two     082° 
Port, steer three zero five      305° 
 
On receipt of an order to steer, for example, 1820, the helmsman should repeat it and bring the vessel 
round steadily to the course ordered. When the vessel is steady on the course ordered, the helmsman 
is to call out:  
"Steady on one eight two".  
The person giving the order should acknowledge the helmsman's reply.  
 
If it is desired to steer on a selected mark the helmsman should be ordered to:  
"Steer on ... buoy / ... mark / ... beacon".  
The person giving the order should acknowledge the helmsman's reply.  
Resolution A.918(22) 
Adopted on 29 November 2001  (Agenda item 9) 
IMO STANDARD MARINE COMMUNICATION PHRASES
A 22/Res.918  - 60 - 
 
 
I:\ASSEMBLY\22 \RES\918.doc  
A2/2  Standard engine orders  
 
Any engine order given should be repeated by the person operating the bridge telegraph(s) and the 
officer of the watch should ensure the order is carried out correctly and immediately.  
 
Order  
 
 1. (Port / starboard engines) Full ahead / astern  
 2. (Port / starboard engines) Half ahead / astern  
 3. (Port / starboard engines) Slow ahead / astern  
 4. (Port / starboard engines) Dead slow ahead / astern  
 5. Stop (port / starboard) engines 
 6. Emergency full ahead / astern  
                   7. Stand by engine  
(Engine -room personnel fully ready to manoeuvre and bridge manned to relay  
engine orders.) 
 8. Finished with engines – no more manoeuvring.  
(Operation of engines no longer required.) 
 
In vessels fitted with twin propellers, the word "both" should be added to all orders affecting both 
shafts, e.g. "Full ahead both", and "Slow astern both", except that the words "Stop all engines" should 
be used, when appropriate. When required to manoeuvre twin propellers independently, this should 
be indicated, i.e. "Full  ahead starboard", "Half astern port", etc. 
 
Where bow thrusters are used, the following orders are used:  
 
9. Bow thruster full / half to port / starboard.  
                 10. Stern thruster full / half to port / starboard.   
                 11. Bow / stern thruster stop  
 
A2/3   Pilot on the bridge  
 
A2/3.1   Propulsion system  
 
. 1  Is the engine a diesel or a turbine? 
. 1.1  The engine is a diesel  / turbine. 
. 2  Is the engine -room manned or is the engine on bridge control?  
. 2.1  The engine -room is manned.  
. 2.2  The engine is on bridge control.  
. 3  How long does it take to change the engines from ahead  to astern?  
. 3.1  It takes ... seconds to change the engines (from ahead to astern). 
. 4  How long does it take to start the engines from stopped?  
. 4.1.   It takes ... seconds to start the engines (from stopped). 
. 5  Is extra power available in an emergency?  
. 5.1  Yes, extra power is available. 
. 5.2  No, extra power is not available. 
. 6  Do you have a controllable or fixed pitch propeller? 
. 6.1  We have  a controllable pitch propeller. 
. 6.2  We have  a fixed pitch propeller. 
. 7  Do you have a right- hand or left -hand propeller? 
. 7.1  We have  a right -hand / left- hand propeller. 
. 8  Do you have a single propeller or twin propellers? 
. 8.1  We have a single propeller / twin propellers. 
Resolution A.918(22) 
Adopted on 29 November 2001  (Agenda item 9) 
IMO STANDARD MARINE COMMUNICATION PHRASES
 - 61 - A 22/Res.918 
 
 
I:\ASSEMBLY\22 \RES\918.doc . 9  Do you have a bow thruster / stern thruster? 
. 9.1  We have one /two/.. bow thruster(s) / stern thruster(s). 
.10  What is the maximum manoeuvring power ahead / astern?  
.10.1    The maximum manoeuvring power ahead / astern is ... kilowatts. 
.11  What are the maximum revolutions ahead / astern?  
.11.1   The maximum revolutions ahead / astern are ... . 
.12  Do the twin propellers turn inward or outward when going ahead?  
.12.1   The twin propellers turn inward / outward (when going ahead). 
 
A2/3.2   Manoeuvring  
 
. 1  I require the pilot card / manoeuvring data. 
. 2  What is the diameter of the turning circle? 
. 2.1  The diameter of  the turning circle is ... metres. 
. 3  What is the advance and transfer distance in a crash -stop?  
. 3.1  The advance distance is ... kilometres / nautical miles,  
the transfer distance is ... degrees (in a crash -stop). 
. 4  How long does it take from hard -a-port to hard -a-starboard?  
. 4.1  It takes ... seconds (from hard -a-port to hard -a-starboard). 
. 5  Is the turning effect of the propeller very strong?  
. 5.1  Yes, the turning effect (of the propeller) is very strong.  
. 5.2  No, the turning effect (of the propeller) is  not very strong.  
. 6  Where is the whistle control?  
. 6.1  The whistle control is on the console / on ... . 
. 7  What notice is required to reduce from full sea speed to manoeuvring speed?  
. 7.1   ... minutes notice is required (to reduce from full sea speed  
   to manoeuvring speed). 
. 8  Do you have an automatic pilot?  
. 8.1  Yes, we have  an automatic pilot. 
. 8.2  No, we do not have an automatic pilot. 
. 9  Give ... short / prolonged blast(s) (on the whistle). 
.10   Stand by lookout. 
   ~ on the bridge  
   ~ on the forecastle  
   ~ in the port/starboard wing  
.11   Maintain a speed of ... knots. 
.12   What is the (manoeuvring) speed at full / half / slow / dead slow ahead?  
.12.1   The manoeuvring speed at full / half / slow / dead slow ahead is ... knots. 
.13   What is the full sea speed / fairway speed?  
.13.1   The full sea speed / fairway speed is … knots. 
 
A2/3.3   Radar  
 
.1  Is the radar operational?  
.1.1   Yes, the radar is operational.  
.1.2   No, the radar is not operation al. 
.2  Where is the radar antenna? 
.2.1   The radar antanna is on … . 
.3  Does the radar have any blind sectors? 
.3.1   Yes, the radar has  blind sectors from … to … degrees and from … to … degrees. 
.3.2   No, the radar does not have any blind sectors. 
.4  Change the radar to  
~ … miles range scale. 
~ relative head -up / north -up / course- up. 
~ true -motion north -up / course- up. 
Resolution A.918(22) 
Adopted on 29 November 2001  (Agenda item 9) 
IMO STANDARD MARINE COMMUNICATION PHRASES
A 22/Res.918  - 62 - 
 
 
I:\ASSEMBLY\22 \RES\918.doc  
A2/3.4   Draft and air draft  
 
.1  What is your present maximum draft?  
.1.1   My present maximum draft is … metres. 
.1.2   My draft forward / aft is … metres. 
.2  What is your air draft?  
.2.1  My air draft is … metres. 
 
A2/3.5   Anchoring  
 
.1   Going to anchor  
 
.1  Stand by port / starboard / both anchor(s) for letting go.  
.2  Walk out the anchor(s). 
.3  We are going to anchorage. 
.4  We will let go port / starboard / both anchor(s). 
.5  Put … shackles  in the water / in the pipe / on deck.  
.6  Walk back port / starboard / both anchor(s) one / one and a half shackle(s). 
.7  We will let go port / starboard / both anchor(s) … shackle(s) and dredge it / them.  
.8  Let go port / starboard / both anchor(s). 
.9   Slack out the cable(s). 
.9.1   Check the cable(s). 
.9.2   Hold on the port / the starboard / both cable(s). 
.10  How is the cable leading?  
.10.1   The cable is leading  
~ ahead / astern.  
~ to port / to starboard.  
~ round the bow.  
~ up and down.  
.11  How is the cable growing?  
.11.1   The cable is slack / tight / coming tight. 
.12  Is / are the anchor(s) holding.  
.12.1   Yes, the anchor(s) is / are holding.  
.12.2   No, the anchor(s) is / are not holding.  
.13  Is she brought up?  
.13.1   Yes, she is brought up in position … . 
.13.2   No, she is not brought up (yet).  
.14  Switch on the anchor light(s). 
.15  Hoist the anchor ball.  
.16  Check the anchor position by bearings / by … . 
.16.1   The anch or position is bearing … degrees,  
    distance … kilometres / nautical miles to … . 
.16.2   Check the anchor position every … minutes. 
 
.2   Leaving the anchorage  
 
.1  How much cable is out?  
.1.1   … shackle(s) is / are  out. 
.2  Stand by for heaving up.  
.3  Put the windlass in gear. 
.3.1   The windlass is in gear. 
.4  How is the cable leading?  
.4.1   The cable is leading  
Resolution A.918(22) 
Adopted on 29 November 2001  (Agenda item 9) 
IMO STANDARD MARINE COMMUNICATION PHRASES
 - 63 - A 22/Res.918 
 
 
I:\ASSEMBLY\22 \RES\918.doc ~ ahead / astern.  
~ to port / to starboard.  
~ round the bow. 
  ~ up and down.  
.5  Heave up port / starboard / both cable(s). 
.6  How much weight is on the cable? 
.6.1   Much / too much weight is on the cable. 
.6.2   No weight is on the cable. 
.7  Stop heaving.  
.8  How many shackles are left (to come in)? 
.8.1   ... shackles are left (to come in). 
.9  Attention! Turn in cable(s). 
.10  The anc hor(s) is / are aweigh.  
.10.1   The cables are clear. 
.11  The anchor(s) is / are  clear of the water / home / foul / secured.  
 
A2/3.6   Tug assistance  
 
.1  We will take ... tug(s). 
.2  The tug(s) will pull / push.  
.3  We use the towing line(s) of  your  vessel.  
.3.1   We use the towing line(s) of the tug(s). 
.4  Stand by for making fast the tug(s). 
.5  Use the centre lead / panama lead.  
.5.1   Use the fairlead  
~ on port side / starboard side. 
~ amidships. 
~ on port bow / starboard bow. 
~ on port / starboard  quarter. 
.6  Send heaving line(s) to the tug(s). 
.7  Send two towing line(s) to the tug(s). 
.8  Lower  towing line(s)  
~ to the tug(s). 
~ ... metre(s) from the water. 
.9  Slack away towing line(s). 
.10  Make fast the tug(s). 
.10.1   Make fast the tug(s) 
~ forward / aft. 
~ on port bow / starboard bow. 
~ on  port quarter / starboard quarter.  
.11  Make fast the forward / aft tug(s) alongside on  port side / starboard side. 
.12  Make fast ... tug(s) on each bow / quarter. 
.13  Put the eyes of the towing line(s) on bitts. 
.14  The tug(s) is / are fast (on ... ). 
.15  Keep clear of  towing line(s). 
.16  Stand by for letting go the tug(s). 
.17  Let go the tug(s). 
.18  Towing line(s) is/are broken.  
 
Resolution A.918(22) 
Adopted on 29 November 2001  (Agenda item 9) 
IMO STANDARD MARINE COMMUNICATION PHRASES
A 22/Res.918  - 64 - 
 
 
I:\ASSEMBLY\22 \RES\918.doc A2/3.7    Berthing and unberthing  
 
.1   General 
 
.1  Is/are the pro peller(s) clear? 
.1.1   Yes, the propeller(s)  is/are clear. 
.1.2   No, the propeller(s)  is/are not clear. 
.1.3   Keep the propeller(s)  clear. 
.2   Are fenders on the berth?  
.2.1   Yes, fenders are on the berth.  
.2.2   No, fenders are not on the berth.  
.3  Have fenders ready fore and aft. 
 
.2   Berthing  
 
.1  We will berth port side / starboard side alongside. 
.2  We will moor  
~ to buoy(s) (ahead and astern). 
~ alongside. 
~ to dolphins. 
.3  Send out  
~ the head / stern / breast lines. 
~ the ... spring(s) forward / aft. 
.4  Do you have tension winches? 
.4.1   Yes, we have tension winches (forward and aft). 
 4.2   No, we do not have tension winches. 
.5  Have the heaving lines ready forward and aft. 
 6   Send the heaving / head / stern / breast line(s) ashore. 
.7   The linesmen will use shackles / lashings for securing the mooring.  
.8  Use  
~ the centre lead / panama lead . 
~ the bow lead.  
~ the port quarter / starboard  quarter lead.  
.9  Heave on the ... line(s) / ... spring(s).. 
.10  Pick up the slack on the  ... line(s) / ... spring(s).. 
.11  Heave away.  
.11.1   Stop heaving.  
.12  Slack away / check the ... line(s) / ... spring(s).. 
.13  Hold on the ... line(s) / ... spring(s). 
.14  Heave in easy.  
.14.1   Heave alongside. 
.15  Keep the ... line(s) / ... spring( s) tight. 
.16  Report the forward / aft distance to ... . 
.16.1   The forward / aft distance to ... ... is metres. 
.17  We have to move ... metres ahead / astern.  
.18  We are in position.  
.19  Make fast fore and aft. 
.20  Finished with manoeuvring stations. 
 
.3   Unberthing  
 
.1  Stand by engine(s). 
.2  Are you ready to get underway?  
.2.1   Yes, we are ready (to get underway). 
Resolution A.918(22) 
Adopted on 29 November 2001  (Agenda item 9) 
IMO STANDARD MARINE COMMUNICATION PHRASES
 - 65 - A 22/Res.918 
 
 
I:\ASSEMBLY\22 \RES\918.doc .2.2   No, we are not ready (yet) ( to get underway). 
.2.3   We will be ready to get underway in ... minutes. 
.3  Stand by for letting  go. 
.4  Single up the ... lines and  ... springs fore and aft. 
.5  Slack away / hold on / heave on the  
~ head / stern line.  
~ breast line. 
~ fore / aft spring.  
.6  Let go  
~ the head / stern line. 
~ the breast line. 
~ the fore / aft spring   
~ all (forwar d / aft). 
.7  Let go the towing line(s). 
.8  Stand by  bow anchor(s). 
.9  Finished with manoeuvring stations. 
 
 
 
 
Resolution A.918(22) 
Adopted on 29 November 2001  (Agenda item 9) 
IMO STANDARD MARINE COMMUNICATION PHRASES
A 22/Res.918  - 66 - 
 
 
I:\ASSEMBLY\22 \RES\918.doc IMO STANDARD  MARINE  COMMUNICATION  PHRASES:  PART B  
 
Part B covers further on -board standard safety-related phrases which, supplementary  t o Part A, may  
assist mariners in meeting other basic on- board communication requirements and may be regarded 
useful for maritime English instruction.  
 
B   ON-BOARD COMMUNICATION PHRASES  
 
B1   Operative ship handling  
 
B1/1  Handing over the watch  
 
B1/1.1  Briefing on position, movement and draft  
 
The officer of the watch should brief the relieving officer on the following:  
 
.1   Position  
 
.1  The present position is  
~ latitude ..., longitude ... . 
~ bearing ... degrees, distance ... cables / nautical miles from/to..... 
~ buoy ...(charted name). 
~ between ... and... . 
~ way point / reporting point ... . 
~ ... . 
.2  The next waypoint / reporting point is ... . 
.3  ETA at ... is ... UTC. 
.4  We are passing / we passed buoy ...(charted name) on port side / starboard side. 
.5  We are approaching buoy ...(charted name) on port side / starboard side. 
.6  Buoy ...(charted name) ... is cables / nautical miles ahead.  
.7  We are entering / we entered area ... . 
.8  We are leaving / we left area ... . 
 
.2   Movements  
 
.1  True course / gyro compass course / magnetic compass course is ... degrees. 
.2  Gyro compass  error is ... degrees plus / minus. 
.2.1   Magnetic compass error is ... degrees east / west. 
.3  Speed over ground / through water is ... knots. 
.4  Set and dr ift is ...  degrees, ... knots. 
.5  We are making ...  degrees leeway.  
.6  The course board is written up.  
.7  The next chart is within .... hours. 
 
.3   Draft  
 
.1  Draft forward / aft is ... metres. 
.2  Present maximum draft is ... metres. 
.3  Underkeel c learance is ... metres. 
 
Resolution A.918(22) 
Adopted on 29 November 2001  (Agenda item 9) 
IMO STANDARD MARINE COMMUNICATION PHRASES
 - 67 - A 22/Res.918 
 
 
I:\ASSEMBLY\22 \RES\918.doc B1/1.2  Briefing on traffic situation in the area  
 
.1  A vessel is  
~ overtaking … (cardinal points) of us. 
~ on opposite course. 
~ passing on port side / starboard side.   
.2  A vessel is crossing from port side. 
.2.1   The vessel  
~ will give way.  
~ has given way.  
~ has not given way yet. 
~ is standing on.  
~ need not give way.  
.3  A vessel is crossing from starboard side. 
.3.1   We  
~ need not give way.  
~ will stand on.  
~ will alter course to give way.  
~ have altered course to give  way.  
.3.2   The vessel will pass ... kilometres / nautical miles ahead / astern.  
.3.3   I will complete the manoeuvre. 
.4  A vessel … (cardinal points) of us is on the same course. 
.5  The bearing to the vessel in ... degrees is constant.  
.6  There is he avy traffic / ... in the area. 
.6.1   There are fishing boats / ... in the area. 
.7  There are no dangerous targets on the radar . 
.7.1   Attention. There are dangerous targets on the radar . 
.8  Call the Master if any vessel  passes with a CPA of less tha n .... miles. 
.8.1   Call the Master if ... . 
 
B1/1.3  Briefing on navigational aids and equipment status  
 
.1  Port side / starboard side  radar is at ... miles range scale. 
.2  The radar is  
~ relative head -up / north -up / course- up. 
~ true -motion north -up / course- up. 
.3  GPS / LORAN is / is not in operation.  
.4  Echo sounder is at ... metres range scale. 
.4.1   The echo sounder recordings are unreliable. 
.5  I changed to manual / automatic steering (at ... UTC). 
.6  Navigation lights are switched on / off. 
 
B1/1.4  Briefing on radiocommunications  
 
.1  INMARSAT ...(type of system)  is operational / is not operational.  
.2  VHF DSC Channel 70 / VHF Channel ... / DSC controller is switched on.  
.2.1   DSC frequency 2187.5 kHz is switched on.  
.3  NAVTEX is switch ed on.  
.4  Following was received on ... at ... UTC 
.5  Shore based radar assistance / VTS / Pilot station is on VHF Channel ... . 
Resolution A.918(22) 
Adopted on 29 November 2001  (Agenda item 9) 
IMO STANDARD MARINE COMMUNICATION PHRASES
A 22/Res.918  - 68 - 
 
 
I:\ASSEMBLY\22 \RES\918.doc  .6  The Pilot station / VTS station requires  
~ flag State. 
~ call sign / identification.  
~ draft. 
~ gross tonnage. 
~ length overall.  
~ kind of cargo.  
~ ETA  at .... . 
~ MAREP POSREP / ... . 
     ~ ... . 
B1/1.5  Briefing on meteorological conditions  
 
.1  A weak / strong (tidal) current is setting .... degrees. 
.1.1   The direction of the (tidal) current will change in ... hours. 
.2  Fog / mist / dust / rain / snow / ... is in the area.  
.3  Automatic fog signal is switched on.  
.4  The wind  increased / decreased (within last ... hours). 
.4.1   The wind is ... (cardinal points) force Beaufort ... . 
.4.2   The wind changed from .... (cardinal points) to .... (cardinal points). 
.5  The sea state is expected to change (within .... hours). 
.6   A smooth/moderate/rough/heavy sea / slight/moderate/high swell of  ... metres from 
...(cardinal points) is expected (within .... hours). 
.7  A tsunami / an abnormal wave is expected by ... UTC. 
.8  Visibility is ... nautical miles. 
.9  Visibility is reduced by fog / mist / dust / rain / snow / ... . 
.10  Visibility is expected  
~ to decrease / increase to ... nautical miles (within ... hours). 
~ variable between ... and ... nautical miles (within .... hours). 
.11  Next weather report is at ... UTC. 
.12  Atmospheric pressure is ...  millibars/hectopascal.  
.13  Barometric change is ...  millibars /hectopascal per hour / within the last ... hours. 
.13.1  Barometer is steady / dropping (rapidly) / rising (rapidly). 
.14  There was a gale warning / tropical storm warning for the area ... at ... UTC. 
 
B1/1.6  Briefing on standing orders and bridge organization  
 
.1  Standing orders for the period from ... to ... UTC ... are: ... . 
.2  Standing orders for the area ... are: ... . 
.3  Take notice of changes in the standing orders. 
.4  Do you understand the standing orders? 
.4.1   Yes, I understand the standing orders. 
.4.2   No, I do not understand, please exp lain. 
.5  Read / sign the standing orders. 
.6  The latest fire patrol was at ... UTC. 
.7  The latest security patrol was at ... UTC. 
.7.1   Everything is in order. 
.7.2   The following was stated: ... . 
.7.3   The following measures were taken: ... . 
.7.4   The following requires attention: ... . 
.8  The lookout is standing by.  
.9  The helmsman is standing by.  
.10  Call the Master at ... UTC / in position ... . 
 
Resolution A.918(22) 
Adopted on 29 November 2001  (Agenda item 9) 
IMO STANDARD MARINE COMMUNICATION PHRASES
 - 69 - A 22/Res.918 
 
 
I:\ASSEMBLY\22 \RES\918.doc B1/1.7  Briefing on special events  
   See also A1/3 “Safety communications”. 
 
.1  There was an  engine alarm at ... UTC due to ...... 
.2  Speed was reduced at ... UTC due to ...... 
.3  Engine(s) was / were stopped at ... UTC due to ...... 
.4  Course was altered at ... UTC due to .... 
.5  The Master / Chief Engineer was called at ... UTC due to ... . 
 
B1/1.8  Briefing on temperatures, pressures and soundings  
 
.1  The  ...(equipment) temperature minimum/maximum is  
~ ... degrees (centigrade) /to maintain.  
~ ... above / below normal.  
~ critical.  
 .1.1   Do not exceed a minimum/maximum temperature of … de grees. 
.2   The  ...(equipment ) pressure minimum/maximum is  
~ ... kiloponds / bars/to maintain.  
~ above / below normal.  
~ critical.  
 .2.1   Do not exceed a pressure of … kiloponds / bars. 
.3  Ballast / fresh water/ fuel / oil /slop sounding is ... metres / cubic metres. 
.3.1   Sounding of  
~ no ... cargo tank is ... metres / cubic metres. 
~ no ... cargo hold is ... centimetres. 
~  ... . 
 
B1/1.9  Briefing on operation of main engine and auxiliary equipment  
See also B1/1.8. 
 
.1  (present) revolutions of the main engine(s) are ... per minute. 
.2  (present) output of the main engine(s) / auxiliary engine(s) are ... kilowatts. 
.3  (present)  pitch of the propeller(s) is ... degrees. 
.4  There are no problems. 
.5  There are problems with ... . 
~ with the main eng ine(s) / auxiliary engine(s). 
~ with ... . 
 6  Call the watch engineer (if the problems continue). 
.6.1   Call the watch engineer ... minutes before the arrival at ... / at ... UTC. 
 
B1/1.10  Briefing on pumping of fuel, ballast water, etc. 
 
.1  There is no  pumping at present. 
.2  We are filling / we filled (no.) ... double bottom tank(s) / the ballast tanks /  
  the ... tank(s). 
.2.1   Fill up … tonnes/ sounding …/ ullage …/ level … to the alarm point. 
.3  We are discharging / we discharged (no.) ... double  bottom tank(s) /  
the ballast tanks / the ... tank(s). 
.4  We are transferring / we transferred fuel / ballast / fresh water / oil 
from (no.) ... tank(s) to (no.) ... tank(s). 
.5  We require a further generator to operate an  additional pump.  
 
Resolution A.918(22) 
Adopted on 29 November 2001  (Agenda item 9) 
IMO STANDARD MARINE COMMUNICATION PHRASES
A 22/Res.918  - 70 - 
 
 
I:\ASSEMBLY\22\RES \918.doc B1/1.11 Briefing on special machinery events and repairs  
 
.1  There  was a breakdown of the main engine(s) (at ... UTC / from ... to ... UTC). 
.1.1   There  was a breakdown of ... (at ... UTC / from ... to ... UTC). 
.2  There was a total blackout (at ... UTC / from ... to ... UTC). 
.2.1   There was a blackout in ...(at ... UTC / from ... to ... UTC) . 
.3  Main engine(s) was / were stopped (at ... UTC / from ... to ... UTC) due to ... .. 
.4  Speed was reduced (at ... UTC / from ... to ... UTC) due to ... . 
.5  Call the Master / Chief Engineer if the revolutions of the main engine(s)  
are below ... per minute. 
.5.1   Call the Master / Chief Engineer / Watch Engineer if ... . 
 
B1/1.12 Briefing on record keeping  
 
.1  The log books / record books are completed and signed.  
.1.1   The note book entries will be copied (into the log books / record books)  
   after the watch.  
.2  Change the paper of the data logger / echo sounder / ... recorder. 
.2.1   Refill the toner / ink of the data logger /  echo sounder / ... recorder 
 
B1/1.13 Handing and taking over the watch/conn 
 
The Master / Chief Engineer or an (engineer) officer handing over the watch should say:  
.1    You have the watch now.  
 
 .1.1   The relieving officer should confirm and say:  
    I have the watch now . 
 
The Maste r/Chief Engineer when called to the bridge/engine (control) room and 
formally taking over the watch, should confirm and say:  
.2    I have the watch now.  
 
 .2.1   The officer of the watch should confirm and say:  
    You have the  watch now. 
 
B1/2  Trim, list and stability  
 
 1  The vessel is on even keel (at present). 
.1.1   The vessel is ... metres down by the head / stern (at present). 
.2  There is no list  (at present). 
.2.1    (present) list is ... degrees to port / starboard.  
.3  Fuel / ballast / fresh water / oil was transferred  from (no.) ... tank(s)  
   to (no.) ... tank(s) to correct the list. 
.3.1   We must transfer fuel / ballast / fresh water / oil  from (no.) ... tank(s) 
 to (no.) ... tank(s) to correct the list. 
.4   Deck cargo / cargo was restowed (in  (no.) ... hold(s)) to correct the list. 
.4.1   We must restow cargo in (no.) ... hold(s) to correct the list. 
.5   (present) stability is good / poor. 
.6   (no.) ... double bottom tank(s) was / were filled to improve the stability.  
.7  Fuel / bal last / fresh water / oil was transferred from (no.) ... tank(s) 
   to (no.) ... tank(s) to improve the stability.  
.7.1   We must transfer fuel / ballast / fresh water/ oil from (no.) ... tank(s)  
to (no.) ... tank(s) to improve the stability.  
.7.2 Fore peak/after peak tank was filled/emptied to change the trim 
Resolution A.918(22) 
Adopted on 29 November 2001  (Agenda item 9) 
IMO STANDARD MARINE COMMUNICATION PHRASES
 - 71 - A 22/Res.918 
 
 
I:\ASSEMBLY\22 \RES\918.doc .8  Cargo was restowed in (no.) ... hold(s) / on deck to improve the stability.  
.8.1   We must restow cargo in (no.) ... hold(s) / on deck to improve the stability.  
.9  Containers were restowed from ... to ... to improve the stability.  
.9.1   We must restow containers from ... to ... to improve the stability.  
 
B2 Safety on board  
 
B2/1 General activities 
 
The phrases of this section apply to most of the emergencies covered in this chapter. 
 
B2/1.1  Rais ing alarm 
 
 .1  Operate the general emergency alarm.  
 .2  Inform the Master / Chief Engineer /... . 
 .3  Inform the ... coast radio station / vessels in vicinity (on radio). 
 .4  Request assistance (on radio) from ... and report. 
 .4.1   Assistance was 
    ~ requested from ... . 
    ~ offered by ... . 
    ~ accepted from ... . 
 .5  Transmit a SÉCURIT É / PAN-PAN / distress alert / MAYDAY and report. 
 .5.1   A  SÉCURIT É / PAN-PAN / distress alert / MAYDAY was transmitted.  
 .6   Was the distress ale rt / MAYDAY acknowledged?  
 .6.1   Yes, the  distress alert / MAYDAY was acknowledged  
    by ... coast radio station / MRCC / vessel(s) in vicinity.  
 .6.2   No, the  distress alert was not acknowledged (yet). 
 .6.1.1   Repeat the distress alert. 
 
B2/1.2  Briefing crew and passengers  
 
See also B4 “ Passenger care”.  
 
.1 Make the following announcement (on the PA - system):  
.2 This is your Captain speaking.  
.2.1  We have grounded / a minor flooding / a minor fire in ... . 
.2.2  There is no immediate danger to crew, passengers or vessel, and there is no reason  
  to be alarmed.  
.2.3  For safety reasons  I request all crew members to go to their assembly stations. 
.2.3.1    All officers to report to the bridge. 
.2.3.2    Watchkeepers remain at stations until further order. 
.2.4 As soon as I have further information I will make another announcement - there is  
 no danger at this time. 
.2.5   Fire fighting teams / damage control teams are fighting the fire / flooding.  
.2.6  We also have radio contact with other vessels / coast radio stations. 
.2.7  The fire / flooding is under control.  
.3  This is your Captain speaking. I have another announcement:  
.3.1  The fire / flooding is not under control yet. 
.3.2  Leave the engine room / superstructure / your stations / your  cabins / ... immediately. 
Close all openings. 
.3.3  Take lifejackets with you.  
.3.3.1    Take your emergency equipment with you according to the muster list. 
.3.4  Stand by fire fighting stations / damage control stations and report. 
Resolution A.918(22) 
Adopted on 29 November 2001  (Agenda item 9) 
IMO STANDARD MARINE COMMUNICATION PHRASES
A 22/Res.918  - 72 - 
 
 
I:\ASSEMBLY\22 \RES\918.doc .3.4.1    Fire fighting  stations / damage control stations are standing by.  
.3.5  All crew members to assembly stations. 
 .3.6   Follow the escape routes shown.  
 .3.7   The route to the assembly station is ... not clear. 
 .3.7.1    The route to the assembly station will be via  ... . 
.3.8   Assemble  
     ~ on deck.  
     ~ on the foredeck / afterdeck.  
    ~ on the ... deck on port side / starboard side. 
    ~ on the ... deck forward of ... / aft of ... . 
.3.9   Do not  
     ~ go to the lifeboat / liferaft stations before ordered . 
    ~ enter the lifeboats / liferafts - the order to enter will be given  
       from the bridge / by the officers. 
.3.10  The following department(s) / crew members will (temporarily)  
     disembark for  safety reasons. 
 
B2/1.3 Checking status of escape routes  
 
.1  Check the escape routes and report. 
.1.1   All escape routes  are clear. 
.1.2   The escape route(s) from ... (to ...) / via ... is / are blocked / not clear (yet). 
.1.3   The escape route(s) from ... (to ...) / via ... will be clear in ... mi nutes.. 
 
B2/1.4 Checking status of lifeboats / liferafts  
 
.1  Check the launching tracks and report. 
.1.1   All launching tracks are clear. 
.1.2   The launching track(s) of no. ...lifeboat / liferaft is / are not clear (yet). 
.1.3   The launching track(s) of no. ... lifeboat / liferaft will be clear in ... minutes. 
.2  Check the working parts and report. 
.2.1   All working parts  are free. 
.2.2   The roll(s) / block(s) / rigging / ... of no. ...lifeboat  is / are not free (yet). 
.2.3   The roll(s) / block(s) / rigging / ... of no. ... lifeboat will be free in ... minutes. 
.3  Check the securings of the launching appliances and report. 
.3.1   All securings  are in the correct position.  
.3.2   The securing of no. ... lifeboat / liferaft  is not in the correct position.  
.3.2.1    Correct the position of the securing . 
.3.3   The securing of no. ... lifeboat / liferaft is  damaged.  
.3.3.1    Replace / repair the securing.  
.3.4   The harbour pin(s) of no. ...lifeboat is / are missing.  
.3.4.1    Replace the harbour pi n(s). 
.4  Check the fuel / oil of the lifeboat engine(s) and report. 
.4.1   The fuel tank of no. ...lifeboat engine is full / not full.  
.4.1.1    Fill up fuel.  
.4.2   The oil level of no. ... lifeboat engine is normal / below normal.  
.4.2.1    Fill up oil.  
.5  Operate the lifeboat engine(s) and report. 
.5.1   All lifeboat engines are operational.  
.5.2   No. ... lifeboat engine is not operational (yet). 
.5.3   No. ... lifeboat engine  will be operational in ... minutes. 
  .6  Check the bilge pumps of the lifebo ats and report. 
.6.1   All bilge are operational.  
.6.2   The bilge pumps of no. ... lifeboat  are not operational (yet). 
Resolution A.918(22) 
Adopted on 29 November 2001  (Agenda item 9) 
IMO STANDARD MARINE COMMUNICATION PHRASES
 - 73 - A 22/Res.918 
 
 
I:\ASSEMBLY\22 \RES\918.doc .6.3   The bilge pumps of no. ... lifeboat will be operational in ... minutes. 
.7  Check the drain plugs and report. 
.7.1   All drain plugs are available. 
.7.2   The drain plug(s) in no. ... lifeboat is / are missing.  
.7.2.1      Replace the drain plug(s). 
.8  Check the slip gear in the lifeboats and report. 
.8.1   All slip gear is in the correct position and secured.  
.8.2   The  slip gear of no. ... lifeboat is not in the correct position.  
.8.2.1    Correct the position of the slip gear. 
.8.3   The slip gear of no. ... lifeboat is not secured.  
.8.3.1    Secure the slip gear. 
.9  Check the lifeboat equipment and report. 
.9.1   All lifeboat eq uipment is complete and operational.  
.9.2   The lifeboat equipment is not complete. 
.9.2.1    Complete the lifeboat equipment.. 
.10  Launch / hoist no. ... lifeboat(s) and report. 
.10.1   The launching appliances are operational.  
.10.2   The launching applian ces are not operational.  
.10.3   No. ... winch / davit is not operational (yet). 
.10.3.1  No. ... winch / davit will be  operational in ... minutes. 
  .10.4   Hoist no. ... lifeboat(s). 
.11  Secure the lifeboat(s) and report. 
.11.1   Lifeboat(s) is / are secur ed . 
.12  Check the liferafts and report. 
.12.1   All liferafts are in position and operational.  
.12.2   No. ... liferaft(s) is / are not operational.  
.12.3   The inflation cord of no. ... liferaft is not secured on board.  
.12.3.1   Secure the inflation cord.  
.12.4   No. ... liferaft container is damaged.  
.12.4.1   Replace the liferaft container in the next port. 
.12.5   The inspection tag of no. ... liferaft is expired.  
.12.5.1   Replace the liferaft in the next port. 
 
B2/1.5 Ordering evacuation  
 
.1  Evacuate a ll rooms / spaces / decks / ... and report. 
.1.1   All rooms / spaces / decks / ... evacuated.  
.2  Evacuate engine room and report. 
.2.1   Engine room evacuated.  
.3  Evacuate no. ... hold(s) / tank(s) and report. 
.3.1   No. ... hold(s) / tank(s) evacuated.  
.4  Evacuate superstructure and report. 
.4.1   Superstructure evacuated.  
.5  Evacuate accommodation and report. 
.5.1   Accommodation evacuated.  
.6  Do not enter ... deck / space / area. 
.7  Report missing persons / injured persons / casualties. 
.7.1   No persons missing / injured.  
.7.2   Number of missing persons / injured persons / casualties is:... . 
.7.3   ... deck / space / area  not accessible (yet). 
.8   Provide first aid  (in the vessel's hospital / at a safe place). 
.8.1   Request medical assistanc e from ... (on radio). 
.9  All persons are outside the danger area.  
 
Resolution A.918(22) 
Adopted on 29 November 2001  (Agenda item 9) 
IMO STANDARD MARINE COMMUNICATION PHRASES
A 22/Res.918  - 74 - 
 
 
I:\ASSEMBLY\22 \RES\918.doc B2/1.6 Roll call 
 
.1  Report number of all persons / passengers / crew members at assembly stations. 
.1.1   Number of all persons / passengers / crew members at assembly station  ...is ... .  
.1.2   Number of persons / passengers / crew members  
   at assembly station  ... is complete. 
.1.3   Number of persons / passengers / crew members  
    at assembly station ... is not complete (yet). 
.1.4   ... passenger(s) / crew member(s)is / are missing.  
.2  Search for missing passenger(s) / crew member(s) and report. 
.2.1   Missing passenger(s) / crew member(s) recovered.  
.2.2    Missing passenger(s) / crew member(s) not recovered (yet) -(search is continuing). 
.3  Watchkeepers to assembly stations. 
.4  Lifeboatmen! Check the equipment of the crew at assembly stations and report. 
.4.1   Equipment of the crew at assembly station ... is complete. 
.4.2   Equipment of the crew at assembly station ...is not complete (yet). 
.4.3   Complete the equipment and report. 
.4.3.1    Go for blanket / stretcher / ... and report. 
.5  Lifeboatmen! Check the outfit of the passengers at assembly stations and report. 
.5.1   Outfit of the passengers at assembly station ... is correct. 
.5.2   Outfit of the passengers at assembly station ... is not correct (yet). 
.5.2.1    Correct the outfit and report. 
.5.2.2    Put on warm clothing / long sleeved shirt / long trousers / strong shoes /  
     head  covering / ... and report. 
.6  Passengers and crew ! Follow the lifeboatmen  
   to the lifeboat stations / liferaft stations on the embarkation deck.  
 
B2/1.7 Ordering abandon vessel  
 
.1  Swing out no. ... lifeboat(s) and report. 
.1.1   No. ... lifeboat(s) swung out. 
.2  Lower no. ... lifeboat(s) alongside the embarkation deck and report. 
.2.1   No. ... lifeboat(s) is / are alongside the embarkation deck.  
.3  Enter the  lifeboat(s) (no. ...) and report. 
.3.1   Enter the  lifeboat(s) / liferaft(s) over the ... deck.  
.3.2   Enter the  lifeboat(s) / liferaft(s) over the  ladders / nets / ma nropes. 
.3.3   Jump into the water and enter the lifeboat(s) / liferaft(s). 
.3.4   Jump onto the liferaft(s) alongside the vessel.  
.3.5   Do not push each other when entering.  
.3.6   Assist injured / helpless persons. 
.3.7   Clear the entrance of the lifeb oat / liferaft. 
.3.8   Sit down in the lifeboat / liferaft immediately.  
.3.9   Hold on to the ropes or to your seat when launching.  
.4  No. ... lifeboat(s) / liferaft(s) entered.  
.5  Let go no. ... lifeboat(s) / liferaft(s) and report. 
.5.1   No. ... lifeb oat(s) / liveraft(s) is / are let go.  
.6  Throw over board no. ... liferaft and report. 
.6.1   No. ... liferaft thrown over board.  
.7  Inform coast radio stations / vessels in vicinity about the number of lifeboats /  
   liferafts launched and report. 
.7.1   Inform coast radio stations / vessels in vicinity about the number of persons  
    in each lifeboat  / liferaft and report. 
.7.2   Inform coast radio stations / vessels in vicinity about the number of  
    crew members remaining on board.  
.7.3   Coast radio station ... / vessels in vicinity informed.  
Resolution A.918(22) 
Adopted on 29 November 2001  (Agenda item 9) 
IMO STANDARD MARINE COMMUNICATION PHRASES
 - 75 - A 22/Res.918 
 
 
I:\ASSEMBLY\22 \RES\918.doc .8  Stand clear of the vessel and report. 
.8.1   No. ... lifeboat(s) / liferaft(s)  standing clear. 
.8.2   No. ... lifeboat(s) / liveraft(s)  not standing clear. 
.9  Rescue boat / no. ...motor lifeboat! 
   Assist no. ... lifeboat(s) / liferaft(s) and report. 
.9.1   Rescue boat / no. ... motor lifeboat is  assisting.  
 .9.2   No. ... lifeboat(s) / liferaft(s)  standing clear of the vessel now. 
 
B2/1.8 In - boat procedures  
 
See also: B4 “ Passenger Care” 2 .5 and 2.6.  
 
.1  Stand by engine / pumps / lookout / entrance and report. 
.1.1   Engine/ pumps / lookout / entrance  is / are standing by.  
.2  Recover persons in water and report. 
.2.1   Number of persons recovered is: ... . 
.2.2   Keep lookout for further persons in water. 
.2.3   Report the total number of persons in lifeboat(s) / liferaft(s). 
.2.3.1    The total number of persons is now: ... . 
.3  Report the  number of injured persons. 
 .3.1   No persons injured.  
.3.2   The number of injured persons is: ... . 
.3.3   Provide first aid to injured persons . 
.3.4   Secure injured / helpless persons. 
.4  Let go sea anchor and report. 
.4.1   Sea anchor is let go.  
.5  Report the number of lifeboats / liferafts in sight. 
.5.1   The number of lifeboats / liferafts i n sight is: ... . 
.6  Contact the lifeboat(s) / liferaft(s) on radio and report. 
.6.1   Lifeboat(s) / liferaft(s) contacted.   
.6.2   No contact possible. 
.7  Give distress signals for identification.  
.7.1   Fire rockets for identification.  
.7.2   Use glasses / lamps / mirrors for identification.  
.7.3   Give sound signals / ...  signals for identification.  
.8  Start the engine. and report. 
.9  Set sail. 
.10  Use oars. 
.11  Join the other lifeboat(s) / liferaft(s).  
.11.1   Connect the lifeboats / liferafts w ith lines and report. 
.11.2   ... lifeboats / liferafts connected.  
 
B2/2 Occupational safety  
 
B2/2.1 Instruction  
 
 .1  Prepare a training plan for occupational safety.  
 .2   When was the last training session on occupational safety?  
 .2.1   The last trai ning session was on  ... (date). 
 .3  When is the next training session on occupational safety?  
 .3.1   The next training session is on ... (date). 
 .4  Are new crew members / passengers  instructed on occupational safety?  
 .4.1   Yes,  new crew members / passengers are instructed.  
  .4.2   No, new crew members / passengers are not instructed (yet). 
Resolution A.918(22) 
Adopted on 29 November 2001  (Agenda item 9) 
IMO STANDARD MARINE COMMUNICATION PHRASES
A 22/Res.918  - 76 - 
 
 
I:\ASSEMBLY\22 \RES\918.doc  .4.3   Instruct  new crew members / passengers by ...(time) / on ...(date). 
 .5  Participation in training sessions on occupational safety is mandatory.  
 
B2/2.2  Practical occupational safety  
 
 .1  Instruct crew on occupational safety before departure. 
 .2  Have special instruction on dangerous goods / heavy lifts/ 
   cargo securing / illumination / ventilation / ... . 
 .3  Where are dangerous goods carried on board?  
 .3.1   Dangerous goods of IMO Class ... are carried  
    ~ on deck (in roped -off areas). 
    ~ in no. ... hold(s). 
    ~ in ... /on... . 
 .4  Prepare  an emergency plan.  
 .5  Brief all crew members / passengers on the symptoms caused by  
   dangerous substances. 
 .6  What signals / communications are used in case of emergency ? 
 .6.1   The following signals / communications are used in case of emergency: ... .  
 .7  Brief all crew members / passengers  
    ~ about restricted areas. 
    ~ how to report in / out (when entering / leaving  bridge / engine room / ... ). 
 .8  Do not enter  the unmanned (engine) room /... space without permission.  
 .8.1   Report on telephone / radio / ... while in   
    the  (engine) room /... space every ... minutes. 
 .9  Brief all crew members / passengers on  the storm.  
 .9.1   Attention!  
    Entering the forecastle / main deck / weather side  / ... of  the vessel is  
    prohibited / dangerous (due to storm). 
 .9.2   Attention!  
    Make use o f  hand rails and lifelines in  corridors and on deck.  
 .9.3   Attention!  
    Close all dead lights and storm doors. 
 .9.4   Attention!  
    Secure all loose objects in your cabins  / on deck / in ... . 
 .10  Brief all crew members / passengers on winter conditions / tropical conditions. 
 .12  Check the completeness and availability of the occupational safety equipment  
   and report. 
 .12.1   Occupational safety equipment is complete and available. 
 .12.2   Following occupational safety equipment is not complete / available: ... 
 .12.3   Occupational safety equipment will be complete and available in ... hour(s). 
 .13  Appoint an officer / a crew member in charge of safety before working.  
 .14  Take additional safety measures for the  
   ~  work on  masts. 
   ~  work outboard.  
   ~  work in hold(s) / tank(s). 
   ~  work in extreme weather conditions / ... . 
 
B2/2.3 Occupational accidents  
  
 .1   Accident  in  engine room / in no. ... hold / in no. ... tank / in superstructure/  
   in accommodati on / in ... space / on deck / outboard / on pier / on ... / in ... . 
 .2  Report injured persons / casualties:  
 .2.1   No person injured.  
 .2.2   The number of injured persons / casualties is: ... . 
Resolution A.918(22) 
Adopted on 29 November 2001  (Agenda item 9) 
IMO STANDARD MARINE COMMUNICATION PHRASES
 - 77 - A 22/Res.918 
 
 
I:\ASSEMBLY\22 \RES\918.doc  .3  What happened?  
 .3.1   Explosion / fire in ... . 
 .3 .2  Accident with cargo.  
 .3.3   Fall from .../ into ... . 
 .3.4   Electrical accident in ... . 
 .3.5   Leakage of gas / ... . 
 .3.6   ... . 
 .4   Take immediate action to recover injured person(s) / casualties. 
 .4.1   Provide first aid.  
 .4.2   Take immediate action to control the danger area. 
 .5  What kind of assistance is required?  
 .5.1   No assistance is  required.  
 .5.2   Medical / technical assistance is  required.  
 .5.3   Shoreside assistance is required.  
 .6  Secure the danger area and report. 
 .6.1   The danger area is secured.  
 .7  Prepare an accident report. 
 
B2/3 Fire protection and fire fighting  
 
B2/3.1 Fire protection  
 
.1 Checking status of equipment 
 
 .1  Have fire patrols ( every ... hour(s) / ... time(s) every watch). 
 .1.1   Have fire patrols  
    ~ in all spaces. 
    ~ in the engine room /  cargo hold(s) / superstructures /  accommodation/  ... . 
    ~ on deck.  
.1.2   Have a permanent fire watch.  
.2  Is everything in order? 
.2.1   Yes, everything is in order. 
.2.2   No, following is not in order: ... . 
.3  Check  the fire / smoke alarm(s)  and report. 
.3.1   All fire / smoke alarms  are operational.  
.3.2   Fire / smoke alarm(s) in ... is /  are not operational (yet). 
.3.3   Fire / smoke alarm(s) in ... will be ope rational in ... minutes. 
.4  Check the portable extinguishers and report. 
.4.1   All portable extinguishers are in position and operational.  
.4.2   The portable extinguishers in ... 
    ~ are not in position (yet).. 
    ~ will be in position in ... minutes.. 
    ~ are not accessible (yet). 
    ~ will be accessible in ... minutes. 
    ~ are missing.  
.4.2.1    Replace the missing portable extinguisher(s). 
.4.3   The inspection tag(s) of  the portable extinguisher(s) in ... is /  are  
   broken / expired.  
.4.3.1   Replace the portable extinguisher(s) with broken / expired inspection tag(s). 
.5  Check the fire mains and report. 
.5.1   All fire mains are operational.  
.5.2   The hydrant(s) in ...  is / are not operational (yet).. 
.5.2.1    The  hydrant(s) will be op erational in ... minutes. 
.5.3   The hose(s) to hydrant(s) in ... is / are worn / cut. 
Resolution A.918(22) 
Adopted on 29 November 2001  (Agenda item 9) 
IMO STANDARD MARINE COMMUNICATION PHRASES
A 22/Res.918  - 78 - 
 
 
I:\ASSEMBLY\22 \RES\918.doc .5.3.1    Replace the worn / cut hose(s). 
.5.4   The hose(s) / spanner (s) / nozzle(s) to hydrant(s) in ... is / are missing.  
.5.4.1    Replace  the missing hose(s) / span ner(s) / nozzles(s). 
.5.5   The fire pump(s) in ... is / are not operational (yet). 
.5.5.1    Fire pump(s) in ... will be operational in ... minutes. 
.5.6   The water pipe(s) in ... is / are leaking.  
.5.6.1    Repair the leaking water pipe(s) in ... . 
.5.7   The water pipe(s) in ... is / are blocked.  
.5.7.1    Free the blocked water pipe(s) in ... . 
.5.8   Pressure in the water pipe(s) in ... is too high / low. 
.5.8.1    Reduce / increase  pressure in the water pipe(s)in ... . 
.6  Check  the fixed foam / gas fi re extinguishing system and report. 
.6.1   The fixed foam / gas system is operational.  
.6.2   The fixed foam/gas system is not operational (yet) 
.6.2.1    The fixed foam / gas system will be operational in ... minutes. 
.7  Check the sprinkler system and report. 
.7.1   The sprinkler system is operational.  
.7.2   The sprinkler system in  ... is  not operational (yet). 
.7.2.1    The sprinkler system in  ...  will be operational in ... minutes. 
.8  Check the ventilation system and report. 
.8.1   The ventilation s ystem is operational.  
.8.2   The ventilation system is not operational (yet) 
.8.2.1    The ventilation system will be operational in ... minutes. 
.8.3   The remote control is not operational (yet). 
.8.3.1    The remote control will be operational in ... minu tes 
.8.4   The indicators are not operational (yet). 
.8.4.1    The indicators will be operational in ... minutes. 
.8.5   The fire dampers in ... are not operational (yet). 
.8.5.1    The fire dampers in ... will be operational in ... minutes. 
.8.6   The fire dampers in ... are painted stuck.  
.8.6.1    Clear the fire dampers. 
.9  Check the skylights / windows / ... and report. 
.9.1   The skylights / windows / ... in / to ...  are open.  
.9.1.1    Close the skylights  / windows / ... in / to ... . 
.10  Check the watertight door control and report. 
.10.1   The watertight door control is operational.  
.10.2   The watertight door control  in ...  is not operational (yet). 
.10.3   The watertight door control in ... will be operational in ... minutes. 
.11  Check  the electri cal lighting and report  
.11.1   The electrical lighting is operational.  
.11.2   The electrical lighting in ...is not operational (yet). 
.11.3   The electrical lighting in ... will be operational in ... minutes. 
.11.4   Switch on / off the electrical lighting i n ... . 
.12  Check the emergency power supply and  report. 
.12.1   The emergency power supply is operational.  
.12.2   The emergency power supply is not operational (yet). 
.12.3   The emergency power supply will be operational in ... minutes. 
.13  Check  the f iremen´s outfits and report. 
.13.1   All firemen´s outfits are complete and available. 
.13.2   The firemen´s outfits are not complete. 
.13.2.1   Complete the firemen´s outfits. 
Resolution A.918(22) 
Adopted on 29 November 2001  (Agenda item 9) 
IMO STANDARD MARINE COMMUNICATION PHRASES
 - 79 - A 22/Res.918 
 
 
I:\ASSEMBLY\22 \RES\918.doc  
B2/3.2 Fire fighting and drills  
 
.1 Reporting fire  
 
 .1  Fire on board!  
 .1.1   Smoke / fumes / fire / explosion  
     ~ in engine room.  
     ~ in no. ... hold(s) / tank(s). 
     ~ in superstructure / accommodation.  
     ~ in ... space. 
     ~ on deck / ... . 
 .1.2   Smoke / fumes from ventilator(s). 
 .1.3   Burnt smell / fu mes in .../ from... . 
 .2  Report injured persons / casualties:  
 .2.1   No person injured.  
 .2.2   Number of injured persons / casualties is: ... . 
 .3  What is on fire? 
 .3.1   Fuel / cargo / car(s) / truck(s) / waggon(s) /  
    containers (with dangerous goods) / ...  on fire. 
 .3.6   No information (yet). 
 .4  Is smoke toxic? 
 .4.1   No, smoke not toxic. 
 .4.2   Yes, smoke toxic   
 .5  Is fire under control?  
 .5.1   Yes, fire (in ... ) under control.  
 .5.2   No, fire (in ... ) not under contr ol (yet). 
 .5.2.1         Fire  spreading (to ... ). 
 .5.2.2    Fire (in ... ) not accessible. 
 .6  Report damage. 
 .6.1   No damage. 
 .6.2   Minor / major damage in .../ to ... . 
 .6.3   No power supply (in ... ). 
 .6.4   Making water in ... . 
 .7  Pressure on fire mains! 
 .8  Shut down main engine(s) / auxiliary engine(s) / ... and report. 
 .8.1   Main engine(s) / auxiliary engine(s) / ... shut down.  
 .9  Stop fuel and report. 
 .9.1   Fuel stopped.  
 .10  Close all openings (in ... / in all room s) and report. 
 .10.1   All openings ( in ... / in all rooms) closed.  
 .10.1.1   Openings in ... not accessible. 
 .11  Switch off ventilator(s) (in ... ) and report. 
 .11.1   Ventilator(s) (in ... ) switched off. 
 .12  Turn  bow / stern to windward.  
 .13  Turn port side / starboard side to windward.  
 .14  Alter course to ... . 
 
Resolution A.918(22) 
Adopted on 29 November 2001  (Agenda item 9) 
IMO STANDARD MARINE COMMUNICATION PHRASES
A 22/Res.918  - 80 - 
 
 
I:\ASSEMBLY\22 \RES\918.doc .2 Reporting readiness for action  
 
 .1  Stand by fire fighting team / rescue team / first aid team / support team and report. 
 .1.1   Fire fighting team / rescue team / first aid team / support team standing by.  
 .2  Stand by main engine and report. 
 .2.1   Main engine standing by.  
 .3  Stand by CO 2 station / ... station/ emergency generator. 
 .3.1    CO 2 station / ... station / emergency generator standing by.  
 .4  Close all openings (in ... / in all rooms) and report. 
 .4.1   All openings (in ... / in all rooms) closed.  
 .4.1.1    Openings in ... not accessible. 
 
.3 Orders for fire fighting  
 
 .1  Start fire fighting.  
 .1 .1  Take one / two / ... fire fighting teams / ... team(s) to scene. 
 .2  Go following route:  
 .2.1   Go through engine room / no. ... hold(s)/tank(s) / superstructure / 
    accommodation / ... space / manhole(s) to ... space / funnel / ... . 
 .2.2   Go from  
     ~ outside / inside to ... . 
     ~ port side / starboard side to ... . 
     ~ ... to ... . 
 .3  Take  following (additional) safety measures and report. 
 .3.1   Have two / ...  members in one team.  
 .3.1.1    Number of members in  fire fighting team / ... team is: ... . 
 .3.2   Have lifeline between each other / to outside. 
 .3.2.1    ... team members have lifelines to each other. 
 .3.2.2    ... team has lifelines to outside. 
 .3.3   Have rescue team on stand -by. 
 .3.4   Maintain visual contact / radio contact on walkie -talkie. 
 .4  Fire fighting team must have following outfit:  
 .4.1   Fire fighting team must have protective clothing / 
    smoke helmets / breathing apparatus / ... . 
 .5  Manning of fire fighting team / ... team(s) as follows:  
 .5.1   Chief Officer / Chief Engineer / ...  in command  
    of fire fighting team / ... team (no. ...). 
 .5.2   Following officer(s) / crew member(s)  in fire fighting team /... team: ...  
 .6  Restrict  action (in .../ on ... ) to ... minutes. 
 .6.1   Agree on  retreat signal and report. 
 .6.1.1    Retreat signal for fire fighting team / ... team ... is ... . 
 .7  Use water / foam / powder / CO2 / sand / ... in ... . 
 .8  Run out fire hoses and report. 
 .8.1   Fire hoses run out. 
 .9  Water on!  
 .9.1   Water is on.  
 .10  Cool down ... with water and report. 
 .10.1   ... cooled down.  
 
.4 Cancellation of alarm 
 
 .1  Is  the fire extinguished?  
 .1.1   Yes, fire (in ... ) extinguished.  
 .1.2   No, fire (in ... ) not  extinguished (yet). 
Resolution A.918(22) 
Adopted on 29 November 2001  (Agenda item 9) 
IMO STANDARD MARINE COMMUNICATION PHRASES
 - 81 - A 22/Res.918 
 
 
I:\ASSEMBLY\22 \RES\918.doc  .1.3   Fire restricted to ... space / area. 
 .2  Post a fire watch and report. 
 .2.1   Fire watch posted ( in ...space / area). 
 .3   Fire extinguishing systems / means remain on stand -by. 
 .4  Fire fighting team / ... team remain on stand -by. 
 .5  Rope off the fire area and report. 
 .5.1   Fire area roped off. 
 .6  Check  the fire area every ... minutes / hour(s) for re- ignition and report. 
 .6.1   Fire area checked, no re- ignition.  
 .6.2   Fire area checked, re- ignition in ... space / area. 
 .6.2.1    Re-ignition extinguished.  
 .7  The fire alarm is cancelled (with following restrictions: ... .) 
 
B2/4 Damage Control  
 
See also  B2/1 "General Activities".  
 
B2/4.1 Checking equipment status and drills  
 
 .1  Check the openings in all spaces / in ... and report 
.1.1   All openings in ... are closed.  
.1.2   Openings in ... are not closed (yet). 
.1.3   Openings in ...  are not accessible. 
 .2  Check the watertight door control and report 
 .2.1   Watertight door control  
     ~  is operational.  
     ~ (in ...) is not operational (yet). 
     ~ (in ...) will be operational in ... minutes. 
 .2.2   Watertight door(s) (in ...)  is / are not accessible. 
 .3 Check the pumps / emergency generator and report 
 .3.1   (Bilge) pump(s) in ... / emergency generator  
     ~  is / are operational.  
     ~  is / are not operational (yet). 
     ~ will be operational in ... minutes. 
.4 Check the power supply and report  
 .4.1   Power ( in / at ... )  
     ~  is available. 
     ~  is not available ( yet). 
     ~ will be available in ... minutes. 
 .5  Check the damage control equipment and report. 
 .5.1   All damage control equipment is complete and available. 
 .5.2   Damage control equipment  is not complete. 
 .5.2.1    Complete the damage control equipment. 
 
B2/4.2 Damage control activities 
 
.1 Reporting flooding  
 
 .1  We have collided (with ...) . 
 .2  We have flooding in ... . 
 .3  Is flooding under control ? 
 .3.1   Yes, flooding under control.  
 .3.2   No, flooding (in ...) not under control (yet). 
 .4  Is danger imminent ?  
Resolution A.918(22) 
Adopted on 29 November 2001  (Agenda item 9) 
IMO STANDARD MARINE COMMUNICATION PHRASES
A 22/Res.918  - 82 - 
 
 
I:\ASSEMBLY\22 \RES\918.doc  .4.1   No,  da nger not imminent. 
 .4.2   Yes, danger of (total) blackout (in ...). 
 .4.3   Yes, danger of heavy listing / capsizing / sinking / ... . 
 
.2 Reporting readiness for action  
 
 .1  Muster damage control team and report.  
 .1.1   Damage control team stand complete and mustered.  
 .2  Is damage control material available? 
.2.1  Yes, damage control material available. 
 .2.2   No, damage control material not available (yet). 
 .2.3   Damage control material will be available in ... minutes. 
 .3  Stand by engine room / ... station and report. 
 .3.1   Engine room / ... station standing by.  
 .3.2   Engine room / ... station flooded.  
 .3.3   Engine room / ... station will be standing by in ... minutes. 
 
.3 Orders for damage control  
 
 .1  Close all openings / outlets / valves (in ...) and report. 
 .1.1   All openings / outlets / valves (in ...) closed.  
 .1.2   Openings / outlets / valves in ... not accessible / not operational.  
 .2  Switch on / off power (at / on / in) and report. 
 .2.1   Power (at / on / in ...) switched on / off. 
 .2.2   Power supply (at / on / in ...) not operational.  
 .3  Close watertight door(s) (in ...) (by hand) and report. 
 .3.1   Watertight door(s) (in ...) closed.  
 .3.2   Watertight door(s) (in ...) not accessible / not operational.  
 .4  Switch on (bilge) pump(s) (in ...)and report. 
 .4.1   (Bilge) pump(s) (in ...) switched on.  
 .4.2   (Bilge) pump(s) (in ...) not operational.  
 .5  Switch over (bilge) pump(s) from ... to ... . 
 .5.1   (Bilge) pump(s) switched over.         
 .5.2   Switching over (bilge) pump(s) not possible. 
 .6  Start damage control.  
 .6.1   Take one / two / ... damage control team(s) to scene. 
 .7  Go following route: ... . 
 .7.1   Go through engine room / no. ... hold(s)/tank(s) / superstructure / m anhole /  
    ... space / ... deck / ... . 
 .8  Go from  
    ~ outside / inside to ... . 
    ~ port side / starboard side to ... . 
    ~  ... to ... . 
 .9  Take following (additional) safety measures and report. 
 .9.1   Have two / ... members in one damage control team.  
 .9.2   Have lifeline to each other / to outside. 
 .9.3   Have rescue team on stand by and report. 
 .9.3.1    Rescue team standing by.  
 .9.4   Maintain visual contact / radio contact on walkie -talkie.    
 .10  Damage control team m ust have following outfit(s). 
 .10.1   Damage control team must have  
     ~ protective clothing  
     ~ safety helmets.   
     ~ lifejackets. 
Resolution A.918(22) 
Adopted on 29 November 2001  (Agenda item 9) 
IMO STANDARD MARINE COMMUNICATION PHRASES
 - 83 - A 22/Res.918 
 
 
I:\ASSEMBLY\22 \RES\918.doc      ~ diving equipment / ... . 
 .11  Manning of damage control team  as follows: ... . 
 .11.1   Chief Officer / Chief Engineer / ... in command of damage control team (no. ...) ... 
 .11.2   Following officer(s) / crew member(s) in damage control team (no. ...):.. . 
 .12  Restrict action (in ...) to ... minutes. 
 .12.1   Agree on retreat signal and report. 
.12.1. 1  Retreat signal  ... . 
 .13  Stop flooding from inside / outside (... space / area) and report. 
 .13.1   Flooding stopped  
 .13.2   Stopping flooding from inside / outside not possible. 
 
.4 Cancellation of alarm 
 
 .1  Has flooding stopped ? 
 .1.1   Yes, flooding (in ...) has stopped.  
 .1.2   No, flooding (in ...) has not (completely) stopped (yet). 
 .2  Is flooding under control ? 
 .2.1   Yes, flooding (in ...)  under control.       
 .2.2   Flooding (in ...)  below / above capacity of (bilge) pump (s). 
 .2.3   Flooding  restricted to ... space / area. 
 .3  Post  damage control watch and report. 
 .3.1   Damage control watch posted (in ...). 
 .4  How much water is in the vessel ? 
 .4.1   Quantity of water (in ...) about ... tonnes. 
 .4.2   Quant ity of water (in ...) not dangerous. 
 .5  (Bilge) pump(s) remain on stand- by. 
 .6  Engine room remains on stand -by. 
 .7  Additional emergency generator remains on stand- by. 
 .8  Damage control team remains on stand -by. 
 .9  Rope off  flooded area. 
 .10  Check  leak every ... minutes / hour(s) and report. 
 .10.1   Leak checked - no flooding.  
 .10.2   Leak checked - minor / major flooding (in ...). 
 .10.2.1   Flooding has stopped.  
 .11  The alarm is cancelled (with following restrictions: ... ). 
 
B2/5 Grounding  
 
See also B2/1 "General Activities"  
 
B2/5.1 Reporting grounding and ordering actions  
 
.1  We are aground.  
.2  Stop engine(s). 
.3  Close watertight doors and report. 
.3.1   Watertight doors closed.  
.4  Is vessel (still) making way?  
.4.1   Yes, v essel making way ahead / astern.  
.4.2   No, vessel not making way.  
.5  Give "vessel aground" signals. 
.6  Inform engine room.  
.7  What part is aground?  
.7.1   Vessel aground forward / amidships / aft / full length.  
 .8  Stand by forward station and aft station and report. 
Resolution A.918(22) 
Adopted on 29 November 2001  (Agenda item 9) 
IMO STANDARD MARINE COMMUNICATION PHRASES
A 22/Res.918  - 84 - 
 
 
I:\ASSEMBLY\22 \RES\918.doc .8.1   Forward station / aft station standing by.  
 .9  Stand by port anchor / starboard anchor. 
.10  What is position ? 
.10.1   Position  ... .   
 
B2/5.2 Reporting damage  
 
.1  Report damage. 
.1.1   No damage. 
.1.2   Crack(s) in plating / no. ... double bottom / no. ... hold(s) / tank(s) /  
    main/auxiliary engine(s) foundation / ... . 
.1.3   Deformation(s) / indentation(s) to plating / to ... . 
.1.4   Deformation(s) / indentation(s) to ... . 
.2  Check flooding and report. 
.2.1   No floo ding.  
.2.2   Flooding in ... . 
.3  Is danger imminent ? 
.3.1   No, danger not imminent. 
.3.2   Yes, danger of  
     ~ heavy listing (to port / starboard)  
     ~ decreasing stability.  
    ~ damage by sea. 
    ~ breaking apart. 
    ~ environmental pollutio n. 
    ~ ... . 
.4  What is  nature of sea bottom ? 
.4.1   Sea bottom rocky.  
.4.2   Sea bottom soft. 
.5  What is state of tide ? 
.5.1   No tide. 
.5.2   Tide ... metres / rising / falling / turning at ... UTC / within ... hours. 
.6  What is wind force and di rection ? 
.6.1   Wind force Beaufort... from ...( cardinal points) . 
.6.1.1    Wind expected to decrease / increase (within the next ... hours). 
.6.1.2 Wind expected to back / veer (within the next ... hours). 
.6.1.  No change expected (within the next ... hours). 
.7  What is sea state ? 
.7.1   Sea smooth/moderate/rough/high / swell slight/moderate/heavy... metres from 
...(cardinal points) . 
.7.2   Sea smooth/moderate/rough/high / swell slight/moderate/heavy ... expected to 
decrease / increase (within the ne xt ... hours). 
.7.3  No change expected (within the next ... hours). 
 .8  What is draft ? 
.8.1 Draft ... metres (port side / starboard side) forward / aft / amidships. 
.9  What is depth of water ?  
.9.1   Greatest depth  ... metres (port side / starboard side) forward / aft / amidships. 
 
B2/5.3 Orders for refloating  
 
.1  Are (bilge) pumps operational ? 
.1.1   Yes, (bilge) pumps operational.  
.1.2   No, (bilge) pumps not operational (yet). 
.1.3   (Bilge) pumps will be operational in ... minutes. 
.2  Is dama ge control material available ? 
Resolution A.918(22) 
Adopted on 29 November 2001  (Agenda item 9) 
IMO STANDARD MARINE COMMUNICATION PHRASES
 - 85 - A 22/Res.918 
 
 
I:\ASSEMBLY\22 \RES\918.doc .2.1   Yes, damage control material available. 
.2.2   No, damage control material not available (yet). 
.2.3   Damage control material will be available in ... minutes. 
.3  Stand by  engine room and report. 
.3.1   Engine room  standing by.  
.4  Stand by all anchors for letting go.  
.5  Report distribution of cargo.  
.5.1   No. ... hold(s) / tank(s) ... tonnes (of ... cargo). 
.5.2   Deck cargo forward / aft / amidships ... tonnes (of ...). 
.5.3   Forepeak / afterpeak ... tonnes. 
.5.4   No. ... double bottom tank(s) ... tonnes (of ballast / ...). 
.6  Transfer cargo from no. ... hold(s) / tank(s) to no. ...hold(s) /  tank(s) and report. 
.6.1   Cargo from no. ... hold(s) / tank(s) transferred to no. ... hold(s) / tank(s). 
.7  Transfer deck cargo from ... to ... and report. 
.7.1   Deck cargo from ... transferred to ... . 
.8  Pump out forepeak / afterpeak and report. 
.8.1   Forepeak / afterpeak pumped out. 
.9  Transfer ballast / ... from no. ... double bottom tank(s) 
   to no. ... double  bottom tank(s) and report. 
.9.1   Ballast / ... from no. ... double bottom tanks transferred to  
   no. ... double bottom tank(s). 
.10  Fill forepeak / afterpeak.  
.11  Jettison cargo from ... and report. 
.11.1   Cargo from ... jettisoned . 
.12  Engine(s) full / ... astern / ahead.  
.13  Has vessel refloated?  
.13.1   Yes, vessel refloated.  
.13.2   No, vessel not refloated (yet). 
 
B2/5.4 Checking seaworthiness  
 
.1  Request a (diving) survey.  
.2  Report the result of the (diving) survey.  
.2.1   No damage. 
.2.2   Following damage to the plating:  
.2.2.1    Crack(s) in area of ... . 
.2.2.2    Deformation(s) / indentation(s) in area of ... . 
.2.3   Following damage to the engine(s) / pipe(s):  
.2.3.1    Crack(s) in the main engine(s) / auxiliary engine(s) foundation.  
.2.3.2   Deformations / fracture(s) to the pipe(s) in / out ... . 
.2.3.3   Fractures / bending of  the bolt(s) of ... 
.2.4   Following damage to the underwater hull: 
    (see also: .1.2.2)  
.2.4.1    Deformation(s) / indentation(s) to the sea water inlet(s) / ou tlet(s). 
.2.4.2    Deformation(s) / indentation(s) to the stem / bulb.  
.2.4.3    Deformation(s) to the propeller(s). 
.2.4.4    (Port / starboard) propeller(s) missing.  
.2.4.5    Deformation to the rudder / to ... . 
.2.5   Dry - docking is recommended / necessary.  
.3  Is the vessel seaworthy ? 
.3.1   Yes, the vessel is seaworthy  
.3.2   No, the vessel is not seaworthy (yet). 
.3.2.1    The vessel must be repaired and re- inspected.  
.3.3   Request ... tug(s). 
Resolution A.918(22) 
Adopted on 29 November 2001  (Agenda item 9) 
IMO STANDARD MARINE COMMUNICATION PHRASES
A 22/Res.918  - 86 - 
 
 
I:\ASSEMBLY\22 \RES\918.doc  
B2/6 Search and rescue  on-board activities  
 
For details  see also IAMSAR Manual,   London/Montreal, 1998.  
 
B2/6.1 Checking equipment status  
 
.1  Check the lifebuoys and report. 
 .1.1   All lifebuoys are complete. 
 .1.2   Lifebuoy(s) at ... is / are damaged / missing.  
.1.2.1   Replace the damaged / missing lif ebuoy(s). 
 .2  When was the last man overboard drill ? 
 .2.1   Last man overboard drill was on ...(date) . 
 .3  Prepare a plan for man overboard drill. 
 .3.1   Prepare a plan for  
     ~ an announced / not announced drill. 
     ~ a daytime / nighttim e drill.  
     ~ a muster (at all stations). 
     ~ a recovering manoeuvre (with dummy / buoy). 
 .4  Have a drill / manoeuvre / muster on ...(date) . 
 
B2/6.2 Person -overboard activities 
 
 .1  Man overboard (on port side / starboard side / astern)! 
 .2  Drop lifebuoy(s). 
 .2.1   Sound "man overboard" alarm.  
 .3  Hoist flag signal "Oscar".  
 .4  Hard -a-port / hard -a-starboard the wheel.  
 .5  Is person in water / lifebuoy located ? 
 .5.1   Yes, person in water / lifebuoy  located.  
 .5.2   Report direction and distance of person in water / lifebuoy.  
 .5.2.1    Direction at ... points port side / starboard side / ... degrees, distance ... metres. 
 .5.2.2    Maintain visual contact to person in water / lifebuoy.  
 .5.3   No, person in water / lifebuoy  no t located (yet). 
 .5.3.1    Look out for person in water / lifebuoy and report. 
 .5.4   Passenger / crew member missing (for ... hours / since ... UTC) 
     - search in vessel negative. 
 .5.4.1    Stop engine(s). 
 .5.4.2    Transmit alarm signal - PAN-PAN / distress alert - MAYDAY to radio coast 
station / Maritime Rescue Co -ordination Centre / vessels in vicinity and 
report. 
 .5.4.3    Alarm signal - PAN-PAN / distress alert - MAYDAY transmitted / 
     acknowledged by ... / not acknowledged (yet).. 
 .6  Return manoeuvre ! Port / starboard, steer... degrees. 
 .7  Report position.  
 .7.1   Position ... . 
 .8  Report traffic situation.  
 .8.1   No vessel in vicinity.  
.8.2  Following vessel(s) in vicinity ... . 
 .9  Report weather situation.  
 .9.1   Sea smooth/moderate/rough/high – swell slight/moderate/heavy from  .. (cardinal 
points). 
 .9.2   Winds force Beaufort... from ... (cardinal points). 
  .9.3  Visibility good/moderate/poor. 
Resolution A.918(22) 
Adopted on 29 November 2001  (Agenda item 9) 
IMO STANDARD MARINE COMMUNICATION PHRASES
 - 87 - A 22/Res.918 
 
 
I:\ASSEMBLY\22 \RES\918.doc  .9.4   Current ... knots to ... (cardinal points). 
.10  Have man overboard stations / lookouts at ... manned and report. 
 .10.1   Man overboard stations / lookouts at ... manned.  
 .11  Stand by for recovering from shipboard and report. 
.11.1   Standing by for recovering from shipboard.  
 .12  Stand by boat / motor lifeboat no. ... for letting go and report. 
 .12.1   Rescue boat / motor lifeboat no. ... standing by for letting go.  
 .13  Let go rescue boat / motor lifeboat. 
 .14  Use VHF Channel ... / frequency ... for communication.  
 .14.1   Use light signals / flag signals / whistle for communication.  
 .15   What is retreat signal for rescue boat / motor lifeboat ? 
 .15.1   Retreat signal ... . 
 .16  Stand by one / two crew member(s) for rescue in water and report. 
 .16.1   One / two crew member(s) standing by for rescue in water. 
 .17  Person overboard rescued / recovered.  
 .18  Stand by boat / rescue litter / rescue net / rescue basket / rescue sling and report. 
 .18.1   Boat / rescue litter / rescue net / rescue basket / rescue sling standing by.  
 .19  Hoist person and report. 
 .20  Report condition of survivor. 
 .20.1   Survivor  
     ~  is in good / bad condition.  
     ~ has hypothermia. 
     ~ is injured.  
     ~ is suffering from shock.  
 .20.2   Person is dead.  
 
B2/6.3 Rescue operation - reporting readiness fo r assistance  
 
See also A1/1.2  "Search and rescue communications"  
 
 .1  Received an alarm signal / PAN-PAN /  
   distress alert - MAYDAY at ... UTC on ... (VHF Channel/frequency) . 
 .2  Observed the following distress signal in ... degrees. 
 .3  Report  the distress position.  
 .3.1   Distress position  ... . 
 .4  Was the alarm signal / PAN-PAN / distress alert - MAYDAY acknowledged?  
 .4.1   The alarm signal / PAN-PAN / distress alert - MAYDAY was acknowledged 
by ... / not acknowledged (yet).. 
 .4.2.1    Acknowledge the PAN-PAN / distress alert - MAYDAY -  RELAY. 
 .4.3   Transmit a MAYDAY - RELAY to ... (radio station). 
 .5  Watch the radar. 
 .6  Have the lookouts manned and report. 
 .6.1   Lookouts are manned.  
 .7  Contact vessels in vicinity of t he distress and report. 
 .7.1   We have contact to following vessel(s) in vicinity of the distress: .... . 
 .7.2   We have no contact (yet). 
 .8  Request information from the vessel in distress and report. 
 .8.1   We have  following information from th e vessel in distress: ... . 
 .8.2   We have  no information (yet). 
 .9  Stand by lines / lifebuoys / nets / derricks / cranes / ... and report. 
 .9.1   Lines / lifeboats / nets / derricks / cranes / ... standing by.  
 .10  Stand by lifeboats / rescue bo at and report. 
 .10.1   Lifeboats / rescue boat standing by.  
 .11  Stand by liferaft(s) as boarding station(s) and report. 
Resolution A.918(22) 
Adopted on 29 November 2001  (Agenda item 9) 
IMO STANDARD MARINE COMMUNICATION PHRASES
A 22/Res.918  - 88 - 
 
 
I:\ASSEMBLY\22 \RES\918.doc  .11.1   Liferaft(s) standing by as boarding station(s). 
 .11.2  Let go liferaft(s) as boarding station(s) with ... crew members (each). 
 .13  Stand by ... crew members for assisting survivors in water and report. 
 .13.1   ... crew members standing by for assisting survivors in water. 
 .14  Switch on the deck lighting / outboard lighting / search lights. 
 .15  Stand by line throwing apparatus and report. 
 .15.1   Line throwing apparatus standing by.  
 
B2/6.4 Conducting search  
 
 .1  We / MV ...  will act as On -scene Co -ordinator. 
 .1.2   Inform radio coast station(s) / MRCC/ vessels in vicinity.  
 .2  Stand by bridge team / lookouts for information / signals of On -scene Co- ordinator. 
 .2.1   Following information / signal received from On -scene Co -ordinator:  
 .3  We carry out search pattern ... / radar search.  
 .3.1   We start search pattern ... radar search at ... UTC. 
 .3.1.1    Inform the crew / lookouts / engine room.  
 .4  Bridge team / lookouts ! 
   Keep sharp lookout for signals / sightings of  the vessel in distress and report  
   every ... minutes. 
 .4.1   Light signals / smoke signals / sound signals / ... signals in ... degrees. 
 .4.2   Objects / vessel in distress / lifeboat(s) / life raft(s) / person(s) in water  
    in ... degrees 
 .5  Stand by rescue team / boat crews / engine room and report. 
 .5.1   Rescue team / boat crews / engine room standing by.  
 .6  Transmit the following information / signals to  the searching vessel(s): ... . 
 
B2/6.5 Rescue activities  
 
See also B2/6.2 "Person -overboard activities"  
 
 .1  Rescue persons in following order:  
    - persons in water 
    - injured / helpless persons  
    - women and children  
    - passengers 
    - crew/members. 
 .2  Ask the survivor(s) the following information:  
 .2.1   What was  the total number of persons on board the vessel in distress ? 
 .2.1.1    Total number of persons was: ... . 
 .2.2   What was the number of casualties ? 
 .2.2.1    Number of casualties was: ... . 
 .2.3   What was the number of lifeboats / liferafts launched ? 
 .2.3.1    Number of lifeboats / liferafts launched was: ... . 
 .2.4   What was the number of persons in lifeboats / l iferafts ? 
 .2.4.1    Number of persons in lifeboats / liferafts was: ... . 
 .2.5   What was the number of persons in water ? 
 .2.5.1    Number of persons in water was: ... . 
 .3  Inform  ...  coast radio station about the name(s) / call sign(s) and dest ination  
   of the vessel(s) with the survivors. 
 .3.1   Inform about the number of survivors on (each) vessel.  
 .3.2   Inform about the condition of the survivors. 
 .4  Inform  ...  coast radio station about the condition of the vessel in distress:  
 
Resolution A.918(22) 
Adopted on 29 November 2001  (Agenda item 9) 
IMO STANDARD MARINE COMMUNICATION PHRASES
 - 89 - A 22/Res.918 
 
 
I:\ASSEMBLY\22 \RES\918.doc .4.1 The vessel in distress  
     ~ capsized / sunk / adrift (near position ... ) / drifting in ... degrees. 
   ~ grounded (in position: ...). 
     ~ on fire. 
     ~ not under command.  
 .5  Transmit the following safety message / navigational warnin g: 
   Vessel in distress (in position ...) danger to navigation.  
 
B2/6.6 Finishing with search and rescue operations  
 
 .1  Search and rescue finished at ... UTC. 
 .1.1   Inform the crew / lookouts / engine room.  
 .2  We resume on -board routine at ... UTC. 
 .3  Inform the coast radio station / searching vessels  
   about the cancellation of search and rescue. 
 .4  We proceed with our  voyage. 
 
B3   Cargo and cargo handling  
 
B3/1   Cargo handling  
 
B3/1.1   Loading and unloading  
 
.1   Loading capacities and quantities 
 
 .1  What is the deadweight of the vessel?  
 .1.1   The deadweight is ... tonnes. 
 .2  What is the hold / bale / grain capacity of  vessel?  
 .2.1   The hold / bale / grain capacity  is ... cubic metres. 
 .3  What is the container cap acity of the vessel?  
 .3.1   The container capacity is ... TEU. 
 .4  How many 20'/ 40' containers will the vessel  load?  
 .4.1   The vessel will load ... 20'/ 40' containers. 
 .5  How many cubic metres of cargo space are required?  
 .5.1   ... cubic me tres of cargo space are required.  
 .6  How many tonnes / cubic metres can the vessel still load?  
 .6.1   The vessel can still load ... tonnes / cubic metres. 
 .7  How much deck cargo can the vessel load?  
 .7.1   The vessel can load ... tonnes / cubic m etres / ... 20'/40' containers on deck.  
 .8  How many cars / trailers / trucks / ... can the vessel load?  
 .8.1   The vessel can load ... cars / trailers / trucks / ... . 
 .9  What is the size of the hatch openings? 
 .9.1   The size of the  hatch openings is  ... by ... metres. 
 .10  What is the safety load of no. ... hold?  
 .10.1   The safety load of the ... deck  of no. ... hold is ... tonnes per square metre. 
 .11  The vessel will still bunker ... tonnes of fuel / fresh water/ ... . 
 
Resolution A.918(22) 
Adopted on 29 November 2001  (Agenda item 9) 
IMO STANDARD MARINE COMMUNICATION PHRASES
A 22/Res.918  - 90 - 
 
 
I:\ASSEMBLY\22 \RES\918.doc .2 Dockside  / shipboard cargo handling gear and equipment 
 
 .1  Are dockside / floating cranes available? 
 .1.1   Yes, dockside / floating cranes  are available. 
 .1.2   No, dockside / floating cranes are not available. 
 .2  What is the safe working load of the crane? 
 .2.1   The safe working load of the crane is  ... tonnes. 
 .3  What is the maximum reach of the crane? 
 .3.1   The maximum reach of the crane is ... metres. 
 .4  What is the handling capacity of the  container crane / gantry?  
 .4.1   The handling capacity of  container crane / gantry is ... containers per hour. 
 .5  What is the handling capacity of the grain elevator/ore loader/ ... ? 
 .5.1   The handling capacity of the  grain elevator / ore loader / is ... tonnes / cubic  
    metres per hou r. 
 .6  What is the pumping capacity of the cargo pumps? 
 .6.1   The pumping capacity of the cargo pumps is ... tonnes per hour. 
 .7  Are (light) fork -lift trucks for the cargo holds available? 
 .7.1   Yes, (light) fork -lift trucks are available. 
 .7.2   No, (light) fork -lift trucks are not available. 
 .8  Only use electric fork -lift trucks in the holds. 
 .9  What is the safe working load of  the fork -lift truck?  
 .9.1   The safe working load of the fork -lift truck is ... tonnes. 
 .10  What is the safe working load of the  derricks / cranes of  the vessel?  
 .10.1   The safe working load of the derricks / cranes of  the  vessel is ... tonnes. 
 .11  What is the safe working load of the ...  slings? 
 .11.1   The safe working load of the  ...  slings is  ... tonnes. 
 .12  These slings do not permit safe cargo handling.  
 .12.1   Replace the slings. 
 .13  Are bob -cats available for trimming?  
 .13.1   Yes, bob -cats are available for trimming.  
 .13.2   No, bob -cats are  not available for trimming.  
 
.3 Prep aring for loading / unloading  
 
 .1  Prepare the vessel for loading / discharging.  
 .2  Unlock the hatch covers. 
 .3  Rig the hatchrails in no. ... hold(s). 
 .4  Give notice of readiness to load/discharging by ... UTC/local time. 
 .5  Is the cargo list available and complete? 
 .5.1   Yes,  the cargo list is  available and complete .  
 .5.2   No, the cargo list is not available and complete (yet). 
 .5.3   The cargo list will be  available and complete in ... minutes. 
 .6  Complete the stowage plan.  
 .7  Make the stability calculation.  
 .8  Are the holds clean / dry / free of smell ? 
 .8.1   Yes, the holds are clean / dry / free of smell.  
 .8.2   No, the holds are not clean / dry / free of smell (yet). 
 .8.3   The holds will be clean / dry / free of  smell in ... minutes / hours. 
 .8.3.1    Clean the hold(s)  / deck(s). 
 .9  Are the safety arrangements in the  hold(s) operational?  
 .9.1   Yes, the safety arrangements in the hold(s) are operational.  
 .9.2   No, the safety arrangements in the  hold(s ) are not operational (yet). 
 .9.3   The safety arrangements in the hold(s) will be operational in ... minutes. 
 .10  Fill the double bottom tank(s) / ballast tank(s) before loading the heavy lifts. 
Resolution A.918(22) 
Adopted on 29 November 2001  (Agenda item 9) 
IMO STANDARD MARINE COMMUNICATION PHRASES
 - 91 - A 22/Res.918 
 
 
I:\ASSEMBLY\22 \RES\918.doc  .11  What is the maximum loading rate / discharging rate? 
 .11.1   The maximum loading rate / discharging rate is ... tonnes per hour. 
 .11.2   Do not exceed the loading rate / discharging rate  of ... tonnes per hour. 
 
.4 Operating cargo handling equipment and hatches 
 
 .1  Open all hatches before loading  / discharging.  
 .2  Are the cranes / derricks operational?  
 .2.1   Yes, the cranes / derricks are operational.  
 .2.2   No, the cranes / derricks are not operational (yet). 
 .2.3   The cranes / derricks will be operational in ... minutes. 
 .3  Rig the  derrick(s) / crane(s) of no. ... hold(s). 
 .4  Check the preventers. 
 .5  Keep within the safe working load of derrick(s) / crane(s). 
 .6  Instruct the winchmen / cranemen . 
 .7  Clean the tween deck(s) before opening lower hold(s). 
 .8  Switch on / off the hold ventilation.  
 .9  Switch on / off the hold lights. 
 .10  Close / open the cargo port(s) to no. ... hold(s). 
 
.5 Maintaining / repairing cargo handling equipment 
 
 .1  Check the hold(s) / hatch cover(s) / derrick(s) / ... for damage and report. 
 .1.1   The hold(s) / hatch cover(s) / derrick(s) / ... is / are in order. 
 .1.2   The cargo battens are damaged.  
 .1.3   The rubber seals of the hatch cover(s) are damaged.  
 .1.4   The preventer(s) of no. ... hold(s) is / are damaged.  
 .1.5   The (Container) lashings are damaged.  
 .1.6   ... is / are damaged.  
 .1.6.1    Replace the damaged ... . 
 .2  The hold ladder(s) is / are  bent. 
 .2.1   Straighten the hold ladder(s). 
 .3  Are the hold ventilators operational?  
 .3.1   Yes, the hold ventilators are operational.  
 .3.2   No, the hold ventilators are not operational (yet). 
 .3.3   The hold ventilators will be  operational in ... minutes. 
 .4  Are the winch motors operational?  
 .4.1   Yes, the winch motors are  operational.  
 .4.2   No, the winch motor of no. ... derrick  is  not operational (yet). 
 .4.3   The winch motor of no. ... derrick will be  operational in ... minutes. 
 .5  Check the repair works personally.  
 
.6 Briefing on stowing and securing  
 
 .1  Check  the  
    ~ careful and safe stowage. 
    ~ complete unloading.  
    ~ proper use of  handling gear. 
    ~ careful separation of  different lots. 
 .2  Close the hatches in case of rain / snow / ... . 
 .3  Refuse damaged / crushed / renailed /wet /torn/ resewn / ...  
   boxes / cartons / cases /crates / bags / ... . 
 .4  Do not overstow  cartons with other goods. 
 .5  Do not use hooks for handling bags. 
Resolution A.918(22) 
Adopted on 29 November 2001  (Agenda item 9) 
IMO STANDARD MARINE COMMUNICATION PHRASES
A 22/Res.918  - 92 - 
 
 
I:\ASSEMBLY\22 \RES\918.doc  .6  Stow ventilation ducts into the bag cargo.  
 .7  Place dunnage between the tiers. 
 .8  Stow the  
    ~ ... into tween deck of no. ... hold.  
    ~ pallets / cartons / ...  closely together. 
    ~ ... in  reefer hold.  
    ~ empty containers in  topmost tiers . 
    ~ container(s)  onto hatch cover(s). 
    ~ ... . 
 .9  Check the  
    ~ containers for damage. 
    ~ correct interlock of  the stowpieces. 
    ~ correct fixing of  the rope clips. 
 .10  Secure the heavy lift(s) immediately . 
 .11  Relash all  lashings. 
 
B3/1.2 Handling dangerous goods   
 
See also IMO IMDG Code, London 1994, as revised.  
 
.1 Briefing on nature of dangerous goods  
 
 .1  What is the IMO Class of these goods? 
 .1.1   The IMO Class of these goods is: ... . 
 .2  This package contains IMO Class ... goods. 
 .3  These goods are flammable / poisonous / ...  . 
 .3.1   Handle these goods with caution.  
 .4  These goods emit flammable gases in contact with water. 
 .4.1   Keep these goods dry.  
 .5  These goods are liable to spontaneous heating and combustion.  
 .6  Do not touch ... . 
 
.2 Instructions on compatibility and stowage  
 
 .1  Observe the IMDG -Code when loading / stowing.  
 .2  Check  the  
    ~ proper segregation of goods. 
    ~ correct technical names in documents. 
    ~ correct marks / labels. 
    ~ compatibility of IMO Class ... goods. 
 .3  Stow IMO Class ... goods  
    ~ away from living quarters / away from ... . 
    ~ separated (by  one hold) from IMO Class ... goods. 
    ~ under / on deck.  
 .3.1   Cover IMO Class ... goods on deck with tarpaulins / ... . 
 .4  Stow  
    ~ flammable goods away from the engine room bulkhea d / ... . 
    ~ infectious substances separated by one hold / compartment from  foodstuffs. 
    ~ ... drums away from IMO Class ... goods at a minimum of ... metres. 
 .5  Brief the stevedores on the dangerous goods in number ... hold(s). 
 .6  Refuse da maged / wet / ... packings with dangerous goods. 
 .7  Ventilate the hold(s) before entering.  
 .8  Load / unload IMO Class ... goods first. 
 .9  No smoking during loading / unloading.  
Resolution A.918(22) 
Adopted on 29 November 2001  (Agenda item 9) 
IMO STANDARD MARINE COMMUNICATION PHRASES
 - 93 - A 22/Res.918 
 
 
I:\ASSEMBLY\22 \RES\918.doc  
.3 Reporting incidents  
 
 .1  Sling(s) with bottles / drums / ... of  IMO Class ... goods were dropped on deck / 
   into no. ... hold / on pier ... . 
 .1.1   Liquid / powder / gas is  spilling.  
 .2  Several drums / barrels / tanks / ... are deformed ( and leaking). 
 .3  The ... container with IMO Class ... goods is spilling out of  the door. 
 .4  Spilling substances of IMO Class ... escaped  into  the sea / harbour water. 
 .4.1   Inform  the pollution control.  
 .5  Temperature in locker / container/ ... with IMO Class ... goods is   increasing (rapidly). 
 .6  Orange / red / ... smoke is developing from IMO Class ... goods (on deck). 
 .7  Explosion in no.  ... hold.  
 .7.1   Damage to gas tank / container /.... 
 .8  Minor / major fire in number ... hold.  
 .8.1   Fire  extinguished.  
 .8.2   IMO Class ... goods re- ignited. 
 .8.3   Fire under control.  
 .8.4   Fire not under control (yet). 
 .8.4.1    Operate the general emergency alarm.    
 .8.4.2    Call the harbour fire brigade / ... . 
 .9  Report injured persons / casualties. 
 .9.1   No person injured.  
 .9.2   Number of injured persons / casualties is ... . 
 
.4 Action in case of incidents  
 
 .1  Take actions according to the Emergency Plan.  
 .2  Turn the vessel out of the  wind – the spilling gas / smoke is toxic. 
 .3  Put on protective clothing and breathing app aratus. 
 .4  Stop the spillage. 
 .5  Let the spillage evaporate. 
 .6  Remove the spillage with synthetic scoops. 
 .6.1   Use absorbents for the spillage.    
 .6.2   Do not touch the spillage. 
 .7  Separate contaminated goods from other goods. 
 .8  Cover  contaminated goods with tarpaulins / ... . 
 .9  Only open the container / hold / locker / ... when smoking is stopped.  
 .10  Cool down  the container/ ... with water. 
 .11  Ventilate the hold(s) carefully.  
 .12  Close the hatch - operate the fire extinguishing system.  
 .13  Fight the fire from a great distance. 
 .14  Flood no. .. hold(s). 
 .15  Rescue persons. 
 .15.1   Take injured persons / casualties to a safe  area. 
 .15.2   Provide first aid to injured persons. 
 .15.3   Call the ambulance. 
 .16  Take off and dispose of contaminated clothing.  
 .17  Alter course for the nearest port (inform on radio). 
 
Resolution A.918(22) 
Adopted on 29 November 2001  (Agenda item 9) 
IMO STANDARD MARINE COMMUNICATION PHRASES
A 22/Res.918  - 94 - 
 
 
I:\ASSEMBLY\22 \RES\918.doc B3/1.3 Handling liquid goods, bunkers and ballast pollution prevention  
 
.1 Preparing safety measures 
 
 .1  Plug the scuppers / drip-trays and report. 
 .1.1   All scuppers / drip -trays are plugged.  
 .2  Close the sea-valves / discharges and report. 
.2.1   All sea- valves / discharges  are closed.  
.3  Stand by absorbent materials and report. 
.3.1   Absorbent materials standing by.  
.4  Stand by  spill control gear and report. 
.4.1   Spill control gear standing by.  
.5  Stand by emergency fire pump / foam monitor / fire extinguishers and report. 
.5.1   Emergency fire pump / foam monitor / fire extinguishers standing by.  
.6  Fit bonding wire and re port. 
.6.1   Bonding wire is fitted.  
.7  Maintain contact on VHF Channels ... with  the bunker barge / oil terminal.  
.8  Is the oil pollution prevention plan available ? 
.8.1   Yes,  the oil pollution prevention plan is  available. 
.8.2   No,  the oil pollu tion prevention plan is  not available (yet). 
.8.3   The oil pollution prevention plan will be  available in ... minutes. 
.9  Instruct the pumpman / ... and report. 
.9.1   Pumpman / ... is instructed.  
 
.2 Operating pumping equipment 
 (including phrases for  communication with bunker barge / oil terminal) 
 
.1  What is the (maximum) loading rate / discharge rate ? 
.1.1   The (maximum) loading rate / discharge rate is: ... tonnes per hour. 
.2  Is the COW - system / inert gas system operational ? 
.2.1   Yes,  the COW - system / inert gas system is  operational . 
.2.2   No, the COW - system / inert gas system is not operational (yet). 
.2.3   The COW - system / inert gas will be  operational in ... minutes. 
.3  When will crude oil washing start ? 
.3.1   Crude oil was hing will start in ... minutes. 
 .4  Are your tanks inerted?  
 .4.1   Yes, my tanks are inerted.  
 .4.2   No, my  tanks are not inerted (yet). 
 .4.3   My  tanks will be inerted in ... minutes. 
 .5  What is the pressure in the inerted tanks? 
 .5.1   The pressure in the inerted tanks is ... bar. 
.6  What is the pumping pressure ? 
.6.1   The pumping pressure is ... bar. 
.7  Can we connect the loading arm ? 
.7.1   Yes, you can connect  the loading arm.  
.7.2   No, you cannot connect the loading arm (yet). 
.7.3   Connect the loading arm in ... minutes. 
.8  Inform ... minutes before loading / discharge will start / finish.  
.8.1   Loading / discharge will start / finish in ... minutes. 
 .9  What is the back pressure for stripping ? 
.9.1   The backpressure for stripping is... bars. 
Resolution A.918(22) 
Adopted on 29 November 2001  (Agenda item 9) 
IMO STANDARD MARINE COMMUNICATION PHRASES
 - 95 - A 22/Res.918 
 
 
I:\ASSEMBLY\22 \RES\918.doc .10  Are the cargo hoses / booms connected ? 
.10.1   Yes,  the cargo hoses / booms are connected.  
.10.2   No, the cargo hoses / booms are not connected (yet). 
.10.3    The cargo hoses / booms will be  connected in ... minutes. 
.11  Are the cargo hoses / booms disconnected ? 
.11.1   Yes, the cargo hoses / booms are disconnected.  
.11.2   No, the cargo hoses / booms are not disconnected (yet). 
.11.3   The cargo hoses / booms will be disconnected in ... minutes. 
.12  Are you ready to load /discha rge? 
.12.1   Yes, I am ready to load / discharge.  
.12.2    No, I am  not ready to load /discharge (yet). 
.12.3    I will be  ready to load / discharge in ... minutes. 
.13  Keep a safe working pressure. 
.14  Open the valve(s) and report. 
.14.1   All full open aboard / ashore. 
.15  Close the valve(s) and report. 
.15.1    All full closed aboard / ashore. 
.16  Start pumping (slowly). 
.17  Are you pumping / receiving ? 
.17.1   Yes, I am pumping / receiving.  
.17.2   No, I am not pumping / not receiving.  
.18  Increase / decrease pumping rate to ... revolutions / bar.. 
.19  (Quantity received) - stop pumping.  
 
.3 Reporting and cleaning up spillage  
 
.1  Leak at manifold connection!  
.1.1   Overflow at ... ! 
.2  Stop pumping ! 
.3  How much is spilled ? 
.3.1   Spill is about ... tonne(s). 
.4  Treat spill with ... . 
.5  Stand by oil clearance team and report. 
.5.1   Oil clearance team standing by.  
.5.2 All crew assist to remove the spill. 
.5.4.1    Spillage stopped.  
.5.4.2 Spill cleaned up.  
.5.4.3    Spill waste contained in save -all/… . 
.6  Oil / ... escaping into sea / harbour water! 
.6.1   Inform pollution control!  
 
.4 Ballast handling  
 
.1  Plug the scuppers and report. 
.1.1 All scuppers are plugged.  
.2  Open / close the sea suction valve / ballast tank valve no. ... and report. 
.2.1   Sea suction valve / ballast tank valve no. ... is open / closed.  
.3  Start  the ballast pump and report. 
.3.1   Ballast pump started.  
.4  Stop the  ballast pump (ballast overflow) and report. 
.4.1   Ballast pump stopped.  
Resolution A.918(22) 
Adopted on 29 November 2001  (Agenda item 9) 
IMO STANDARD MARINE COMMUNICATION PHRASES
A 22/Res.918  - 96 - 
 
 
I:\ASSEMBLY\22 \RES\918.doc .5  Pump out ballast ta nk no. ... and report. 
.5.1   Ballast tank no. ... is pumped out. 
.5.2   Stop the ballast pump - ballast dirty ! 
 
.5 Cleaning tanks  
 
.1  Pump the slops into the slop tank . 
.2  Dispose the sludge into the sludge tank.  
.3  Order  a shore slop tank / slop b arge. 
.3.1   We have ... tonnes of slops / sludge. 
.4  Start / stop pumping slops. 
.5  Keep a safe working pressure. 
 
B3/1.4 Preparing for sea  
 
 .1  Close and secure the hatch covers for sea and report 
 .1.1   Hatch covers   closed and secured.  
 .2  Lash and secure the goods for sea and report. 
 .2.1   Goods  lashed and secured.  
 
(In ro/ro -ferries: the execution of instructions 3, 4 and 5 given from the bridge on  
radio should be confirmed by the person in charge of the corresponding station using 
phrases 3.1, 4.1 and  5.1)  
 
 .3  Close and secure the bow door / stern door and report.. 
 .3.1   Bow door / stern door closed and secured.  
 .4  Fold and secure the bow ramp  / stern ramp / side ramp and report. 
 .4.1   Bow ramp / stern ramp / side ramp fol ded and secured.  
 .5  Lash and secure all cars / trucks / wagons / ... and report. 
 .5.1   All cars / trucks / wagons / ... lashed and secured.  
 .6  Lower and secure the derricks / cranes and report. 
 .6.1   Derricks / cranes lowered and secured.  
 .7  Check the seaworthiness of  the holds and report 
 .7.1   Holds seaworthy.  
 .8  How much ballast can we take (down to her marks)? 
 .8.1   We can take ... tonnes of ballast. 
 .9  Check the trim.  
 .9.1   Fill the forepeak to decrease the stern trim.  
 .9.2   Fill  the double -bottom tank(s) . 
 .9.3   Pump fuel  from ... tank to ... tank to bring  the vessel upright. 
 
B3/2 Cargo care  
 
B3/2.1 Operating shipboard equipment for cargo care  
 
 .1  Is the equipment for cargo care operational?  
 .1.1   Yes, the  equipment for cargo care is  operational.  
 .1.2   No, the ... (equipment ) is  not operational (yet). 
 .1.3   The ... (equipment) will be  operational in ... minutes. 
 .2  What is the air change rate of the hold ventilators? 
 .2.1   The air change rate of the hold ventilators is  ... -fold.  
Resolution A.918(22) 
Adopted on 29 November 2001  (Agenda item 9) 
IMO STANDARD MARINE COMMUNICATION PHRASES
 - 97 - A 22/Res.918 
 
 
I:\ASSEMBLY\22 \RES\918.doc  .3 Are the temperature / humidity recorders in the hold(s) operational?  
 .3.1   Yes,  the temperature / humidity recorders in  the  hold(s) are operational.  
 .3.2   No,  the temperature / humidity recorders in the hol d(s) are  not operational (yet). 
 .3.3   The temperature / humidity recorders in the hold(s)  
    will be operational in ... minutes. 
 .4  Instruct the crew how to connect  reefer plugs / clip- on units / ... and report. 
 .4.1   The crew is instructed how to connect reefer plugs / clip- on units / ... . 
 
B3/2.2 Taking measures for cargo care  
 
.1 Carrying out inspections  
 
 .1  The holds must be inspected by the  surveyor before loading.  
 .2  Check the reefer holds for proper loading preparation and repo rt. 
 .2.1   The reefer holds are ready for loading.  
 .2.2   The reefer holds are not ready for loading (yet). 
 .2.3   The reefer holds will be ready for loading in ... minutes. 
 .3  Are the holds  clean (dry and free of smell)? 
 .3.1   Yes, the holds are clean( dry and free of smell). 
 .3.2   No,  the holdsare  not clean (dry and free of smell) (yet). 
 .3.3   The holds will be clean (dry and free of smell) in ... minutes / hours. 
 .4  Check  the operation of the hold ventilators and report  
 .4.1   The hold ventilators  are operational.  
 .4.2   The hold ventilators ( in no. ... hold(s)) are not operational (yet). 
 .4.3   The hold ventilators (in no ... hold(s)) will be operational in ... minutes. 
 .5  Order a surveyor to check  the reefer plugs / cargo securings. 
 .6  Is the certificate of survey available and complete? 
 .6.1   Yes, the certificate of survey  is available and complete. 
 .6.2   No,  the certificate of survey  is not available and complete (yet). 
 .6.3   The certificate of survey  will be available and complete in ... minutes / hours. 
 .7  Check the lashings and securings every day / ... hours.. 
 .8  Enter all checks into the log -book.  
 .9  Before unloading open the hatches only when the surveyor is  present. 
 
.2 Describing damage to the cargo 
 
 See also section B2/1.2.3 "Reporting incidents"  
 
 .1  The  ...(cargo) is in a bad condition.  
 .2  The packages of ...(cargo) are  
    ~ wet / damp / mouldy.  
    ~ marked by fresh water / sea water. 
 .3  The metal of  ...(cargo) is rusty.  
 .4  The bands of  ...(cargo) are  broken / missing  / rusty.  
 .5  The crates / cases with ...(cargo) are renailed.  
 .5.1   The boards of  crates/cases with ...(cargo) are  loose. 
 .6  The marks / labels on  ...(cargo) are unclear / illegible /false. 
 .7  The contents of drums / barrels / ... are  unknown.  
 .8  The weight of  the ...(cargo) is unknown.  
 .10  The boxes / crates / cases / ... with ...(cargo) are  damaged.  
 .11  The bags / bales with ...(cargo) are  torn / resewn / spilling.  
 .12  The drums / barrels / ... with ...(cargo) are deformed / spilling . 
 .13  The boxes / cartons / cases/ ... with ...(cargo) are crushed.  
 .14  The bags / boxes / cartons / ... with ...(cargo) are  not full / slack / empty.  
Resolution A.918(22) 
Adopted on 29 November 2001  (Agenda item 9) 
IMO STANDARD MARINE COMMUNICATION PHRASES
A 22/Res.918  - 98 - 
 
 
I:\ASSEMBLY\22 \RES\918.doc  .15  The bags / boxes / cartons / ... with ...(cargo) are  second -hand.  
 .16  The boxes/cartons/cases/ ... with bottles of ...(cargo) are (partly) broken.  
 .17  The ...( cargo) is (partly)  
    ~ eaten by rats  /worms. 
    ~ infected by  vermin.  
    ~ missing.  
 .18  ... conta iner(s) are damaged.  
 .18.1   ... container(s) were damaged  
     ~ before loading.  
     ~ during loading.  
     ~ by shifting on board.  
     ~ by heavy seas. 
 .19  ... container(s) were washed overboard (inform on radio). 
 .20  The temperature in no. ... hold is  
   above normal / below normal / critical / ... degrees Celsius. 
 .21  The humidity of  ...(cargo) is above normal / below normal / critical.  
 
.3 Taking actions  
 
 See also section B2/1.2.4 "Action in case of incident"  
 
 .1  Switch on  the hold ventilation to supply / exhaust air. 
 .2  Switch off  the hold ventilation (in case of shipping seas). 
 .3  Switch on / off  the automatic temperature control / recorder. 
 .4  Relash the container(s) /car(s) / trucks(s)... in no. ... hold / on ... deck.  
 .5  Replug the reefer container(s) in no. ... hold/on deck.  
 .6  Secure the shifting cargo in no. ... hold / on ... deck.  
 .7  Protect the deck cargo of ...(cargo)  against  sun / rain / shipping seas. 
 .8  Keep the deck cargo of ...(cargo)  wet  / dry.  
 .9  Check the contents of  drum(s) / barrel(s) /container(s) / ... with false labels. 
 
 
B4  Passenger care  
The phrases of this chapter should help Masters, officers and crew members of passenger 
vessels  and passenger ferries to inform passengers on safety aspects and to manage them in 
case of an emergency.  
 
B4/1 Briefing and Instruction  
 
B4/1.1 Conduct of passengers on board  
 
.1  General information on conduct of passengers  
 
 .1  Ladies and Gentlemen.  This is Captain ... speaking.  
   I have pl easure in informing you that all safety equipment is in full working order.   
   The bow / stern doors are closed and secured.  The vessel is in all respects ready for sea.   
   Please listen carefully to the safety instructions which follow.  In the unl ikely event of an  
   emergency, please obey the orders given on the public address system.  
 .2  Passengers are requested to read all notes and leaflets concerning safety regulations. 
 .3  All regulations concerning the vessel's routine have to be obeye d. 
 
Resolution A.918(22) 
Adopted on 29 November 2001  (Agenda item 9) 
IMO STANDARD MARINE COMMUNICATION PHRASES
 - 99 - A 22/Res.918 
 
 
I:\ASSEMBLY\22 \RES\918.doc .2  Briefing on prohibited areas, decks, and spaces 
 
   Safety regulations do not permit passengers to enter the following spaces:  
   - navigating bridge  
   - engine room  
   - manoeuvring areas at the front and back end of the vessel  
   - cargo r ooms and compartments 
   - service rooms  
   - all areas and spaces marked "Crew only"  
   - all closed, sealed or roped off areas, spaces and rooms  
   - car decks when the vessel is at sea. 
 
B4/1.2  Briefing on safety regulations, preventive measures and communications  
 
.1   Drills  
 
 .1  International regulations require all passengers to be assembled in a drill  
   which has to take place within 24 hours of departure.. 
 .2  A drill will be held to familiarize passengers with their assembly stations,  
   with their life-saving equipment and with emergency procedures. 
 .3  All passengers must attend this drill. 
 
.2   The general emergency alarm  
 
 .1  In case of emergency seven short blasts and one prolonged blast  
   will be given with the ship's whis tle and the alarm system.  
 .2  Remain calm when you hear the general emergency alarm.  
 .3  Passengers will be taught how to act and behave  
   in cases of emergency . 
 
.3   Preventing / reporting fire  
 
 . 1  Always remember that fire is the greatest ha zard aboard ship.  
 . 2  Always act immediately if you detect fire or smell fumes or smoke. 
 . 3  Always inform a member of the crew if you detect fire or smell fumes or smoke.  
 . 4  Be careful to extinguish cigarettes completely.  
 . 5  Put used cigarettes in a container provided.  
 . 6  Never smoke in bed.  
 . 7  Never smoke on deck except in areas labelled as smoking areas. 
 . 8  Never throw a cigarette overboard.  
 . 9  The use of naked light and  open fire is strictly prohibited.  
 .10  Never use l ighted candles. 
 .11  Never hang anything over or near an electric bulb.  
 .12  Never use an electric iron in a cabin.  If you need to iron something  
   use the ironing room on .... deck.  The key may be collected at the information desk.  
 .13  If you detect a fire or smell fumes or smoke act immediately as follows:  
   - Call out "Fire !"  
   - Operate the nearest fire alarm  
   - Inform a member of the crew 
 - Telephone the navigating bridge.  The number to dial is .... 
 
Resolution A.918(22) 
Adopted on 29 November 2001  (Agenda item 9) 
IMO STANDARD MARINE COMMUNICATION PHRASES
A 22/Res.918  - 100 -  
 
 
I:\ASSEMBLY\22 \RES\918.doc .4   PA announcements on emergency  
 
 .1  Attention please!  Attention please! 
   This is your captain with an important announcement.  
   I repeat, this is your captain with an important announcement. 
 .1.1   We have grounded/ a minor flooding (in ... )/ a minor fire (in ... ). 
 .1.2   There is no immediate danger to our passengers or the ship  
    and there is no reason to be alarmed.  
 .1.3   For safety reasons we request all passengers to go to their assembly stations  
    on deck and wait there for further instructions. 
 .1.4   Please follow the instructions given by the officers and crew. 
 .1.5   The ship's fire fighting team / damage control team is fighting the fire / flooding.  
 .1.6   We also  have radio contact with other ships / radio coast stations. 
 .1.7   The fire / flooding is under control.  
 .1.8   As soon as I have further information I will make another announcement. 
    I ask you kindly to remain calm.  There is no danger at this time. 
 .2  This is your Captain speaking. I have another announcement.  
   The fire / flooding is not under control  yet. 
 .2.1   There is smoke / flooding in ... Access to this area is prohibited..  
 .2.2   For safety reasons we request all passengers to prepare to go to their assembly 
stations.  Access to the assembly stations wi ll be via ...... .  Do not forget to take your 
lifejackets and blankets with you.  
 .2.3   All passengers of deck no. ..... are requested to follow the crew members who will 
escort you to your assembly stations. 
 .2.4   When you get to your assembly stati ons put on your lifejackets and wait for further 
orders. 
 .2.5   Do not go to the lifeboat stations until you are ordered to do so.  
 .2.6   Go to your lifeboat stations. 
 .2.7   Follow the escape routes shown.  
 .2.8   Do not enter the lifeboats / liferafts.  The order to enter the lifeboats / liferafts will be 
given from the bridge or by the officers. 
 .2.9   We have just received a message from shore / other vessels that assistance is on the 
way.  Assistance should arrive within approximately .... hou rs. 
 
.5   Person overboard 
 
 .1 If you see anybody fall overboard, act as follows:  
   - call out "Man overboard"  
   - throw lifebuoys overboard  
   - keep your eyes on the person in the water 
- show / tell an  officer / crew the person's position in the  water, or telephone the  
  bridge immediately, the number is .... . 
 
.6   Protective measures for children  
 
 .1  Children must be kept under permanent observation.  
 .2  Never let children climb or sit on the ship's rails. 
 .3  Special lifejackets for children are available; please ask the steward / stewardess. 
 .4  You may leave your children under qualified care in the children's playroom / on the 
playdeck on .... deck from .... to .... hours. 
 
Resolution A.918(22) 
Adopted on 29 November 2001  (Agenda item 9) 
IMO STANDARD MARINE COMMUNICATION PHRASES
 - 101 - A 22/Res.918 
 
 
I:\ASSEMBLY\22 \RES\918.doc B4/2   Evacuation and Boat Drill  
 
B4/2.1  Allocating / di recting to assembly stations, describing how to escape  
 
 .1  When the general emergency alarm is sounded, which consists of seven short blasts and 
one  prolonged blast, all passengers have to go to their assembly station.  Take your 
lifejackets and blanke ts with you.  Lifejackets are stored in your cabins under your beds 
and at your assembly stations.  You are encouraged to try on your lifejacket. 
 .2   All passengers must put on 
   - warm clothing  
   - long trousers, long -sleeved shirts / jackets 
   - strong shoes and head covering.  
 .3   All passengers with their lifejackets and blankets are requested to go to their assembly 
stations/ the lounge / the ...  immediately.  
 .4   From your assembly stations you will be escorted to your lifeboats / liferafts. 
 .5   All passengers are requested to carefully study the safety instructions behind their 
cabin  doors. 
 .6  All passengers are requested to follow the escape routes shown.  
 .7   Do not use lifts / elevators. 
 .8   All passengers are requested to strictly obey the instructions given by the officers or crew. 
 .9  When you hear the abandon ship alarm, which consists of one prolonged  and one short  
blast repeated continuously, please act in the same manner as under the general 
emergency alarm.  
 .10   During the voyage you may hear some other sound signals.  These are exclusively for the 
information of the crew. 
   Please, act only if you hear the general emergency alarm or the abandon ship alarm.  
 .11   If you have any questions regarding safety, do not hesitate to ask any of the officers or 
crew. 
 
B4/2.2  Briefing on how to dress and what to take to assembly stations  
 
 .1   Take your lifejacket and a blanket. 
   You will find your lifejacket under your bed.  
 .2  Put on warm clothing, long -sleev ed shirts, strong shoes and head covering whatever the 
weather.  No high -heeled shoes. 
 .3   Do not forget personal documents, your spectacles and medicine if necessary.  
 .4  Do not return to your cabin to collect your property.  
 
B4/2.3  Performing roll call  
 
 .1  At your assembly station one of the officers / crew will perform a roll call.  
 .2  The officer / crew will say "This is a roll call", and will call out the passengers 
individually by their names. 
 .3  When your name is called out, please answer loudly "Here".  
 .4  If one of your cabinmates is not able to attend the roll call, please inform the officer/crew 
immediately.  
 
B4/2.4  Briefing on how to put on lifejackets  
 
 .1  (dependent on type of lifejacket used ) 
   - pull the lifejacket over your head  
   - tighten the strings well  
   - pull the strings around your waist and tie in front. 
  
Resolution A.918(22) 
Adopted on 29 November 2001  (Agenda item 9) 
IMO STANDARD MARINE COMMUNICATION PHRASES
A 22/Res.918  - 102 -  
 
 
I:\ASSEMBLY\22 \RES\918.doc  .2  Follow closely the demonstration given by the officer / crew.  
   The crew members will help you if necessary.  
 .3  Carefully study the demonstration in the pictures in your cabins. 
 .4  Carefully study the demonstration in the diagram at the assembly station.  
 
B4/2.5  Instructions on how to embark and behave in lifeboats / liferafts  
 
 .1  Enter the lifeboat / liferaft only when ordered by an offi cer / lifeboatman.  
 .2  Clear the entrance of the lifeboat / liferaft immediately after entering.  
 .3  Do not push each other when entering the lifeboat / liferaft. 
 .4  Hold on to ropes or to your seat when lowering / hoisting.  
 .5  Sit down in the lifeboat / liferaft immediately.  
 .6  Keep your lifejackets on.  
 .7  Provisions and drinking water will be distributed by an officer / lifeboatman only.  
 .8  Strictly obey all instructions given by the officer / lifeboatman.  
 .9  Discipline in the lifebo at / liferaft is of vital importance. 
 
B4/2.6  On-scene measures and actions in lifeboats / liferafts  
 
 .1  Keep a sharp lookout for persons in the water. 
 .2  Have a line / hook / knife / lifebuoy ready.  
 .3  Do not take off  your shirts / long trousers / head covering whatever the weather. 
 .4  Pump out the water / free the lifeboat / liferaft from water. 
 .5  Who needs medical first aid?  
 .6  Everybody will get the same ration of provisions and water. 
 .7   Warning! Do not drink sea water whatever the situation.  
 .8   We will send a MAYDAY. 
 .9   We will fire rockets / use smoke buoys / ..... to attract attention.  
 .10  We will join the other lifeboats / liferafts. 
 
B4/3  Attending to passengers in an emergency  
 
B4/3.1  Informing on present situation  
 
 .1  The vessel was abandoned in position .... due to  
   fire / grounding / collision / flooding / heavy list / serious damage / ... . 
 .2  Keep calm.  There is no reason to panic.  
   The officers / lifeboatmen know exactly what to do.  
 .3  There are enough life-saving appliances for everyone on board.  
 .4  The Maritime Rescue Co- ordination Centre/vessels in the vicinity have already been 
informed of our situation.  
 .5  Vessels / helicopters / aircraft are coming to our rescue. 
 .6  Vessels  / helicopters / aircraft will reach us within ...... hours. 
 .7  We have radio contact with rescue craft. 
 .8  There are enough provisions and drinking water for 48 hours. 
 .9  You obtain medicine for seasickness from the lifeboatman.  
 
B4/3.2  Escorting helpless passengers  
 
 .1  ...... persons are missing.  
 .2  Search all cabins / WCs/showers for missing persons. 
 .3  Assist those who need help.  
 .4  Help children, elderly, disabled, injured or sick persons with lifejackets. 
 .5  Give assistance wh en entering lifeboats / liferafts. 
Resolution A.918(22) 
Adopted on 29 November 2001  (Agenda item 9) 
IMO STANDARD MARINE COMMUNICATION PHRASES
 - 103 - A 22/Res.918 
 
 
I:\ASSEMBLY\22 \RES\918.doc  .6  We require warm clothing and blankets  
   for the children / elderly / disabled / injured / sick.  
 .7  We require a stretcher for the disabled / injured / sick.  
 .8  All persons, please move closer.  
 .8.1   The elderly / disabled / injured / sick need room to lie down.  
 .9  Everyone, please, be quiet.  The children / the sick need rest. 
 
 
 
 
Resolution A.918(22) 
Adopted on 29 November 2001  (Agenda item 9) 
IMO STANDARD MARINE COMMUNICATION PHRASES
A 22/Res.918  - 104 -  
 
 
I:\ASSEMBLY\22 \RES\918.doc  
ANNEX 2 
 
 
 
PROCEDURE FOR AMENDI NG THE IMO STANDARD  
MARINE COMMUNICATION  PHRASES  
 
 
1 The Committee should receive and ev aluate proposals for amendments and/or additions 
to the IMO Standard Marine Communication Phrases, submitted as appropriate. 
 
2 Such proposals should be examined collectively rather than individually when, in the 
Committee’s judgement, they are sufficient or of such importance as to warrant examination.  
 
3 Amendments to the IMO Standard Marine Communication Phrases should normally 
come into force at intervals of approximately five years. When, however, amendments are of a 
very important nature and/or require urgent action, the period may be shortened to three years. 
Amendments adopted by the Committee will be notified to all concerned and will come into 
force twelve months after the date of notification.  
 
 
 
_________________ 
 
 
 
Resolution A.918(22) 
Adopted on 29 November 2001  (Agenda item 9) 
IMO STANDARD MARINE COMMUNICATION PHRASES
Resolution A.918(22) 
Adopted on 29 November 2001  (Agenda item 9) 
IMO STANDARD MARINE COMMUNICATION PHRASES
