 
MARITIME AND PORT AUTHORITY OF SINGAPORE  
PORT MARINE CIRCULAR  
No.20 OF 2019 
01 DEC EMBER 2019  
Shipping  Community                                                                                                                                                                            
COMPLYING WITH RULES FOR VESSELS NAVIGATING THROUGH THE 
STRAITS OF MALACCA AND SINGAP ORE    
 
1 Vessels  navigating in the S traits of Malacca and Singapore  are required to 
comply with the ‘ Rules For Vessels Navigating Through the Straits of Malacca and 
Singapore ’ adopted by the International Maritime Organi zation ’s (IMO)  Maritime 
Safety Committee at its sixty -ninth session  in 1998 , in accordance with the provision 
of Resolution A.858(20).  
 
 2 The Maritime and Port Authority of Singapore would like to remind all 
shipmasters including the Bridge Resource Management team in  particular those on 
board  deep draught vessels ( DDVs1) and very large crude carriers ( VLCCs2) 
transiting in the westbound lane of the Traffic Separation Scheme and precautionary 
areas of the Singapore Strait shall:  
 
a) Allow for an under keel clearance of at  least 3.5 metres at all times during 
the e ntire passage through the S traits of Malacca and Singapore  
b)  As far as it is safe and practicable, proceed at speed of not more than  12 
knots over grounds in the  westbound lanes between positions 01°12·51’N, 
103°52·15’E and 01°11·59’N, 103°50·21’E and between position 
01°11·13’N 103°49·08’E and 01°08·65’N, 103°44·30’E.   (Between South 
of St John’s Island to Raffles Lighthouse)  
3 The IMO Circular  SN/Cir.198 ( see A nnex)  provides information  on the ‘Rules 
For Vessels Navigating Through the Straits of Malacca and Singapore ’. 
 
 
 
CAPT KEVIN WONG  
PORT MASTER  
MARITIME AND PORT AUTHORITY OF SINGAPORE  
 
                                                           
1 A vessel having a draught of 15 metres or more shall be deemed to be a DDV  
2 A tanker of 150,000 DWT and above shall be deemed to be a VLCC  

ANNEX   
ROUTEING MEASURES OTHER THAN TRAFFIC SEPARATION SCHEMES  
1 The Maritime Safety Committee, at its sixty -ninth session (11 May to 20 May 1998), adopted in accordance 
with the provisions of resolution A.858 (20), the following routeing measures other than traffic separation 
schemes, attached hereto:  
1.1 Amended  rules for  vessels navigating through the Straits of Malacca and Singapore (Annex 1).  
2 The aforementioned routeing measures were implemented at 0000 hours UTC on 1 December 1998.  
ANNEX 1  
 RULES FOR VESSELS NAVIGATING THROUGH THE STRAITS OF MALACCA AND SINGAPORE  
I  Definitions  
     For the purpose of these Rules the following definitions shall apply:  
1. A vessel having a draught of 15 metres or more shall be deemed to be a deep draught vessel.  
2. A tanker of 150,000 DWT and above shall be deemed to be a very large crude ca rrier (VLCC).  
Note: The above definitions do not prejudice the definition of “vessel constrained by her draught” described 
in Rule 3 (h) of the International Regulations for Preventing Collisions at Sea, 1972.  
 II  General Provisions  
1. Deep draught vessels and VLCCs shall allow for an under keel clearance of at least 3·5 metres at all 
times during the entire passage through the Straits of Malacca and Singapore and shall also take all 
necessary safety precautions, when  navigating through the traffic separation schemes.  
 
2. Masters of deep draught vessels and VLCCs shall have particular regard to navigational constraints 
when planning their passage through the Straits.  
 
3. All deep draught vessels and VLCCs navigating within t he traffi c separation schemes are recommended 
to use the pilotage service of the respective countries when they become available.  
 
4. Vessels shall take into account the precautionary areas where crossing traffic may be encountered and 
be in a maximum state o f manoeuvring readiness in these areas.   
III  Rules  
Rule 1  Eastbound deep draught vessels shall use the designated deep -water routes.  
Rule 2 Eastbound  deep draught vessels navigating in the deep -water routes in Phillip Channel and 
Singapore Strait shall as far as practicable, avoid overtaking.  
Rule 3  All vessels navigating within the traffic separation scheme shall proceed in the appropriate   
traffic lane in the general direction of traffic flow for that lane and maintain as steady a course 
as possible, consistent with safe navigation.  
Rule 4   All vessels having defects affecting operational safety shall take appropriate measures to    
overcome these defects before entering the Straits of Malacca and Singapore.  
Rule 5   In the event of an emergency or breakdown of a vessel in the traffic lane, the vessel shall, as 
far as practicable and safe, leave the lane by pulling out to the starboard side.  
 
 
 
Rule 6   (a) Vessels proceeding in the westbound lane of the traffic separation scheme “In the  
Singapore Strait” when approaching Raffles Lighthouse shall proceed with caution, taking note 
of the local warning system, and, compliance with Rule 18(d) of the International  Regulations 
for Preventing Collisions at Sea, 1972, avoid impeding the safe passage of a vessel 
constrained by her draught which is exhibiting the signals required by Rule 28 and which is 
obliged to cross the westbound lane of the scheme in order to approach the single point 
mooring facility (in approximate position 01°11·42’N, 103°47·40’E, from Phillip Channel).  
(b) Vessels proceeding in the traffic separation schemes when approaching any of the                 
precautionary areas shall proc eed with caution, taking note of the local warning system, and, 
in compliance with Rule 18 (d) of the International Regulations for Preventing Collisions at Sea, 
1972, avoid impeding the safe passage of a vessel constrained by her draught which is 
exhibiti ng the signals required by Rule 28 and which is obliged to cross that precautionary 
area.  
(c) Information relating to the movement of ships constrained by their draught as referred to in 
paragraphs (a) and (b) above will be given by radio broadcasts. The p articulars of such 
broadcasts are promulgated by Notices to Mariners. All vessels navigating in the area of the 
traffic separation scheme should monitor these radio broadcasts and take account of the 
information received.  
Rule 7  VLCCs and deep draught vess els navigating in the Straits of Malacca and Singapore shall  as 
far as it is safe and practicable, proceed at a speed of not more than 12 knots over the ground 
in the following areas:  
a) At One Fathom Bank traffic separation scheme ;  
b) Deep -water  routes in the Phillip Channel and in Singapore Strait;  and 
c) Westbound lanes between positions 01°12·51’N, 103°52·15’E and 01°11·59’N , 
103°50·21’E and  between position 01°11·13’N 103°49·08’E and 01°08·65’N, 
103°44·30’E.  
Rule 8  All vessels navigating in the routeing system of the Straits of Malacca and Singapore shall 
maintain at all times a safe speed consistent with safe navigation, shall proceed with  caution, 
and shall be in a maximum state of manoeuvring readiness.  
Rule 9  (a) Vessels which are fitted with VHF radio communication are to participate in the ship       
reporting system adopted by the Organization.  
(b) VLCCs and deep draught vessels navigating in the Straits of Malacca and Singapore are 
advised to broadcast, eight hours before entering the traffic separation schemes, navigational 
information giving name, deadweight tonnage, draught, speed and times of passing One 
Fathom Bank Lighthouse, Raffles Lighthouse and Horsburgh Lighthouse.  Difficult and 
unwieldy tows are also advised to broadcast sim ilar information.  
Rule 10  All vessels navigating in the Straits of Malacca and Singapore are requested to report by radio 
to the nearest shore authority any damage to or malfunction of the aids to navigation in the 
Straits, or any aids out of position in t he Straits.  
Rule 11   Flag States, owners and operators should ensure that their vessels are adequately equipped 
in accordance with the appropriate international conventions/recommendations.  
IV Warning  
Mariners are warned that local traffic could be unaware  of the internationally agreed regulations and practices of 
seafarers and may be encountered in or near the traffic separation schemes, and should take any precautions 
which may be required by the ordinary practice of seamen or by the special  circumstances  of the case.  
Source:  SN/Circ. 198 dated 26 May 1998  
Note:  The coordinates in WGS 84 Datum were inserted by Hydrographic Department, MPA.   
