SAFE PASSAGE 
THE STRAITS OF 
MALACCA AND SINGAPORE
www.bimco.org
4.3
CORPORATE SIGNATURE
COLOUR VARIANTS
MPA MARKETING COMMUNICATIONS GUIDEProper application of the corporate colours enhances 
the image of MPA.
The colours blue, green and black are the full colours 
of the corporate signature and should be used for all
important applications, eg. corporate stationery and signage. The full colour version of the signature 
should be used on white background whenever
possible. However, when only one colour is permitted 
due to printing limitations or cost considerations,the signature can be applied in one colour.
In instances where the corporate signature must
be applied on a dark background, it may be reversed 
out in white. Whenever possible, the background should be one of the corporate colours to maintain
consistency.
For special colour application utilising foils, either 
gold or silver can be used to complement the 
background or application.
For further information, please refer to the Corporate Identity 
Standards Manual.Full Colour
Single Colour
Reversed White

SAFE PASSAGE 
THE STRAITS OF MALACCA AND SINGAPORESAFE PASSAGE 
THE STRAITS OF MALACCA AND SINGAPORE
2
3Today, the Straits of Malacca and Singapore (SOMS) is 
one of the world’s busiest shipping lanes, carrying about 
one third of the world’s traded goods. Projections show 
that this stretch of water will see a significant increase in maritime trade and it is ready to handle vessel traffic 
safely and efficiently.
To ensure the safety and efficiency of vessels plying these 
waters, all stakeholders must continue to cooperate 
mutually. Navigating safely results in the protection of the marine environment. 
This pamphlet has been prepared to give you a quick 
guide to ensure a safe passage for ships in the SOMS. 
The purpose is to help you to navigate along the 435 
mile long busy and narrow waterway in a safe manner by drawing attention to several measures and local condi-
tions that mariners should be aware of. 
You will find detailed guidelines, regulations and instruc-
tions in the following references:
1. International Regulations for Preventing Collisions at 
Sea, 1972 (COLREGs).
2. Singapore Port Information (by Maritime and Port Authority of Singapore) 
3. 
Admiralty Charts, 5502-Mariners’ Routeing Guide Malacca 
& Singapore Straits (by UK Hydrographic Office).
4. Passage Planning Guide – Malacca and Singapore Straits (by Witherby Publishing Group)
5. Ships’ Routeing (by IMO)• Part B Section V Traffic Separation Scheme (TSS) 
• Part F (Associated Rules and Recommendations on Navigation – Rules for Vessels Navigating through the SOMS)
• Part G Section I/14 (STRAITREP)Introduction
6. IMO Circulars and Resolutions• SN.1/Circ 317 (3 green lights ) 
• SN.1/Circ.282 (Anchoring in the SOMS)
• Resolution A.954(23) (Caution on Use of VHF)
• Resolution A.917(22), Resolution A.956 (23) 
(Operational Use of AIS)
7. Admiralty Sailing Directions, Malacca Strait and West 
Coast of Sumatera Pilot (by UK Hydrographic Office)
8. Cooperative Mechanism  (www.cooperativemechanism.org.my)
It should be noted that this pamphlet in no way substi-tutes or replaces prevailing internationally agreed regula-
tions and guidelines. 
This pamphlet is a product of the Co-operative Mechanism 
for the SOMS.Introduction

SAFE PASSAGE 
THE STRAITS OF MALACCA AND SINGAPORESAFE PASSAGE 
THE STRAITS OF MALACCA AND SINGAPORE
4
5Mariners know that there are many considerations that must 
be taken into account when navigating through the SOMS. 
Whilst there are international requirements regulating ves -
sels’ safe operation and navigation, and ensuring that paper 
charts and electronic navigational charts (ENC) are up to 
date, there are various local characteristics found in the 
SOMS such as the challenges created by cross-traffic, involv -
ing small local craft whose personnel are not familiar with internationally agreed regulations and practices of seafarers. 
The pamphlet provides general guidelines on the measures 
to be observed and local conditions to be aware of to assist 
transiting ships enjoy a safe passage.• Collision Preventiono COLREGs
o Precautions when using VHF and AIS
• Routeing Measureso TSSo Night Signals for Crossing Traffic
o Rules for Vessels Navigating through the SOMS
• STRAITREP
o Reporting Sectors
o Participating in STRAITREP 
o Vessel Traffic Services
• Anchoring 
o No Anchoring 
o Emergencies 
• Local Traffic Considerations
o Malacca Strait
o Singapore Strait
• Visibility 
o Hazeo Local WeatherShipmaster’s General 
GuidelinesConsiderations for 
SOMS Passage

SAFE PASSAGE 
THE STRAITS OF MALACCA AND SINGAPORESAFE PASSAGE 
THE STRAITS OF MALACCA AND SINGAPORE
6
7The SOMS are in places narrow and busy, where a large 
number of vessels transit daily, carrying about one-third 
of the world’s traded goods. 
These vessels include bulk carriers, container vessels, 
ferries, tankers, very large crude carriers (VLCC), barges 
under tow and fishing vessels.
COLREGs
The International Regulations for Preventing Collisions at 
Seas (COLREGs) are to be complied with by ships navigat-
ing the SOMS.  Mariners’ attention  is drawn to the very important Rule 7(a) which states that “every vessel shall 
use all available means appropriate to the prevailing cir-
cumstances and conditions to determine if risk of collision exists”.  In doing so, they are to take note of the follow-
ing concerning VHF and AIS.Collision PreventionPrecautions When Using 
VHF and AIS
PRECAUTIONS WHEN USING VHF AND AIS
VHF
Many investigations worldwide have revealed that VHF com -
munication is one of the contributing factors in collisions at 
sea. 
In many of the so called “VHF assisted” collisions, the “VHF 
communication” between  ships had created misunderstand -
ings leading to close quarter situations or collisions. 
Mariners are reminded that compliance with COLREGs is a 
much more effective way to avert a collision than the use of VHF communications.
Reference: IMO Resolution A.954(23) AIS
AIS information may be used to assist in collision avoidance 
decision making, bearing in mind two cautionary points:
• AIS is an additional source of navigational information. It 
does not replace, but supports, navigational systems such as radar target-tracking and VTS 
• The use of AIS does not negate the responsibilities of the mariners to comply at all times with COLREGs.
In addition, mariners are to take note that not all ships are fitted with AIS.  Also at times, AIS may be switched off or 
the information provided by AIS may be incomplete or incor
-
rect.  
Reference: IMO Resolution A.917 (22), Resolution A.956 (23)

SAFE PASSAGE 
THE STRAITS OF MALACCA AND SINGAPORESAFE PASSAGE 
THE STRAITS OF MALACCA AND SINGAPORE
8
9The Rules have been established for vessels navigating 
through the SOMS.  
Mariners must comply with the rules concerning:• Deep draft vessels and VLCCs navigating  within the 
TSS 
• Vessels having defects affecting operational safety 
• Action to be taken in an emergency or breakdown of 
a vessel in the traffic lane 
• Radio broadcast on movements of vessels  constrained by their draught 
• Safe speed 
• Participating in ship reporting system
Reference: IMO Ships’ Routeing, Part FRouteing MeasuresRules for vessels navigating through 
the Straits of Malacca and Singapore
Traffic Separation Scheme
The IMO-adopted Traffic Separation Scheme (TSS) was 
established in the SOMS between Permatang Sedepa (One 
Fathom Bank) and the entrance to the South China Sea in 
the vicinity of Horsburgh Lighthouse, a total distance of 250 nm.  Designated routes for deep-draught vessels and 
Precautionary Areas are laid down on the charts. 
Reference: IMO Ships’ Routeing, Part B Section V
Night Signals for Vessels Crossing the TSS in the Singapore 
Strait
Vessels crossing the TSS and Precautionary areas in the Singapore Strait are recommended to display the night sig
-
nals consisting of 3 all-round green lights in a vertical line.
Displaying the night signals shall not exempt the crossing ves -
sel of its obligation to give way to other vessels in a crossing 
situation or any other rules under the COLREGs 
Reference: IMO SN.1/Circ. 317

SAFE PASSAGE 
THE STRAITS OF MALACCA AND SINGAPORESAFE PASSAGE 
THE STRAITS OF MALACCA AND SINGAPORE
10
11STRAITREP
The IMO-adopted Mandatory Ship Reporting System known 
as STRAITREP has been established in the SOMS to enhance 
navigational safety and to protect the marine environment. 
In general, all passenger vessels, vessels carrying hazardous cargo, vessels of 300 gross tonnage and above and all vessels 
of 50 metres and above are required to participate in the ship 
reporting system.
Participating in STRAITREP 
The operational area of the STRAITREP is divided into 9 sec -
tors with each sector operating on a different VHF channel.
Vessel Traffic Service
The VTS Authorities provide the following services to vessels 
participating in the STRAITREP. 
Information Service  (e.g. information on Deep Draft Vessel & 
VLCC transiting through the Deep Water Route) 
Navigational Assistance (e.g. advice to individual vessels on 
potential close quarter situation)
Navigational broadcast (e.g. information on unlit or dam -
aged buoys/beacons)Meteorological Information (e.g.  warnings on haze, adverse 
weather conditions)STRAITREP
Sector 1 – VHF Channel 66
Sector 2 – VHF Channel 88Sector 3 – VHF Channel 84Sector 4 – VHF Channel 61Sector 5 – VHF Channel 88Sector 6 – VHF Channel 88Sector 7 – VHF Channel 73Sector 8 – VHF Channel 14Sector 9 – VHF Channel 10The VTS authorities for the STRAITREP are as follows:
Sector 1 to Sector 5 - Klang VTS
Sector 6            - Johor VTS
Sector 7 to Sector 9 - Singapore VTSIn addition, the Singapore VTS provides vessels with informa -
tion on traffic situation at the Pilot Boarding Grounds at the 
Port of Singapore so as to assist Mariners navigate safely to 
embark their pilots.
A master who provides or receives information with 
STRAITREP is not relieved from any of his duties and respon -
sibilities as a master.
Reference: IMO Ships’ Routeing, Part G Section I/14

SAFE PASSAGE 
THE STRAITS OF MALACCA AND SINGAPORESAFE PASSAGE 
THE STRAITS OF MALACCA AND SINGAPORE
12
13Anchoring
There has been a proliferation of vessels anchoring within 
the TSS and Precautionary Areas in the SOMS as well as 
between the landward limits of the TSS and approaches to 
the ports.  These vessels pose a risk to the safety of navigation by obstructing traffic flow and port approaches.  Mariners 
are advised of the following concerning anchoring in the 
SOMS:
No Anchoring
Mariners are therefore reminded not to anchor in any areas in the TSS of the SOMS (Ref.: Rule 10 (g) of COLREGs); as well 
as between landward limits of the TSS and approaches to the 
port. Vessels entering any port in any of the littoral States shall anchor in the anchorages designated by the respective 
littoral States. 
The Maritime Authorities of Indonesia, Malaysia and 
Singapore closely monitor the identities and locations of ves
-
sels that are anchoring indiscriminately. The relevant author -
ity will take appropriate action including reporting to the 
Flag State of the vessel.
Emergencies 
In exceptional circumstances such as an emergency where anchoring cannot be avoided, shipmasters are  advised to 
carefully ascertain the location of pipelines, submerged 
installations and submarine cables  from nautical charts and publications to avoid anchoring over these objects.
Reference: IMO SN.1/Circ. 282Visibility in the SOMS could be restricted due to the follow
-
ing conditions 
Haze
SOMS has been affected by severe smoke haze periodically 
due to forest fires in the region. The haze can be made worse 
by the dry seasons, change in wind directions and precipita -
tion, especially during the Southwest Monsoon Season which 
causes the visibility to be severely restricted.  
Local weather
Sudden thunderstorms with heavy rain may occur during the monsoon periods between June and August and between 
October to December and cause the visibility to be severely 
restricted. 
During periods of restricted visibility, shipmasters are advised 
to keep a proper lookout and navigate with caution. Ships shall comply with the COLREGs and in particular, Rule 19, 
Rule 20 and Rule 35 concerning conduct of vessels in restrict
-
ed visibility, exhibition of navigation lights and sound signals 
in restricted visibility, respectively.Visibility

SAFE PASSAGE 
THE STRAITS OF MALACCA AND SINGAPORESAFE PASSAGE 
THE STRAITS OF MALACCA AND SINGAPORE
14
15Local Traffic 
Considerations
When navigating in the SOMS, shipmasters will encounter 
the following local traffic conditions and are advised to keep 
a proper lookout and navigate with caution:
Tugs and Barges
There are numerous tugs and barges which travel at low 
speed in the SOMS. In the Singapore Strait, they are usually 
observed in the vicinity of Batu Berhanti in the morning cross -
ing the TSS bound for the Port of Singapore.
Crossing Traffic
Vessels transiting the SOMS may encounter crossing traffic, 
particularly in these areas:
There are frequent ferries crossing the SOMS in the follow -
ing areas:• Approaches to Port Dickson Harbour Limit
• Approaches to Melaka Harbour Limit
• Approaches to Muar Harbour Limit
• Approaches to Batu Pahat Harbour Limit
• Between Kukup and Pulau Karimun
• Main Straits 
 
(01 11’.6 N , 103 51’.7E )
• Approaches to Sisters’ Fairway  
(01 12’.8 N , 103 50’.7E )
• Approaches of East Keppel Fairway  
(01 13’.1N, 103 52’.9E)
• Approaches to Tanah Merah Ferry Terminal  
(01 15’.3N , 103 59’.1E  & 01 17’.0N 103 58’.8E)
• Between Tanah Merah Ferry Terminal and Pulau Bintan  
(01 15’.5N , 104 05’.1E)Local Traffic 
Considerations
Crossing Traffic is also expected to be encountered at the fol -
lowing precautionary areas:
• Off Sultan Shoal Lighthouse   
(103 26’.7E to 103 36’.1E)
• Off Pulau Sebarok/Belakang Padang  
(103 49’.1E to 103 50’.7E) 
• Off St John’s Island/Pulau Sambu  
(103 52’.2E to 103 54’.3E) 
• Off Tanjong Septapa/Pulau Bintan  
(104 03’.2E to 104 14’.9E)
• Off Tanjung Ru/Port Klang Harbour Limit
• Off Port Dickson/Port Dickson Harbour Limit
• Off Tanjung Keling/Sungai Udang Harbour Limit
• Off Tanjung Piai/Johor Bahru Harbour Limit
Vessels in the westbound lane near the vicinity of Singapore 
Pilot Eastern Boarding Ground “A” (01 13’.5N, 103 53’.4E 
and Pilot Eastern Boarding Ground “B” (01 15’.6N, 103 57’4E) 
may encounter vessels from the eastbound lane crossing the westbound lane to head for these pilot boarding grounds. 
VLCCs in the deep water route bound for the Shell SBM in the 
Port of Singapore cross the TSS in the vicinity south-east of 
the Raffles Lighthouse ( 01 09’.6N , 103 44’.5E ).
Fishing Boats
Poorly lit small fishing boats may be encountered in the 
SOMS. This is particularly true in the western part of the 
Singapore Strait. Mariners are reminded that often small fish -
ing boats do not follow COLREGs.
BIMCO
Bagsvaerdvej 161
2880 Bagsvaerd
Denmark
frontoffice@bimco.org
www.bimco.orgIn September 2007, under the International Maritime Organization (IMO)’s 
“Protection of Vital Shipping Lanes” initiative, the maritime authorities of 
Indonesia, Malaysia and Singapore established a historic agreement to suc -
cessfully launch a Co-operative Mechanism (CM) for the Straits of Malacca 
and Singapore (SOMS). The mechanism is a ground-breaking initiative in international co-operation.
The CM is the key platform in the SOMS for the littoral States, user states, 
stakeholders and the industries to dialogue, exchange information and share 
their valuable perspectives on important SOMS safety and environmental 
issues. 
Since 2007, the CM has overseen many projects aimed at achieving these 
goals, gathering the views and expertise of the three littoral states working 
closely with all stakeholders.
The promotion of safety of navigation and the protection of the marine 
environment dominate the work of the CM. 
One concrete demonstration of co-operation and burden sharing is the num
-
ber of projects which have been jointly initiated. These involve everything 
from wreck removal to the maintenance of aids to navigation.
www.cooperativemechanism.org.my
BIMCO – An ocean of expertise...
BIMCO is the oldest of the international shipping associations, comprising a membership of a broad 
range of stakeholders with vested interests in the shipping industry, including ship-owners, manag -
ers, brokers and agents. The shipowner segment alone operates about 65 per cent of the world’s merchant fleet measured in deadweight tonnage. The association’s main objective is to facilitate 
the commercial operations of its global membership through the provision of quality informa
-
tion and advice, education and training. While promoting fair business practices and developing 
standards for contract terms, BIMCO is a strong advocate for harmonisation and standardization 
of all shipping related activity, whether at sea, in ports or ashore. In support of its commitment 
to ensure a level playing field for all actors within the global shipping industry, the association 
promotes the development and application of internationally agreed regulatory instruments.  In 
acknowledgement of its constructive contributions to the regulatory process, BIMCO is accredited as a Non-Governmental Organisation (NGO) with all relevant United Nations agencies. In the 
pursuit of reaching its objectives, the association maintains a close dialogue with Governments 
and diplomatic representations around the world including maritime administrations, regulatory institutions and other stakeholders.
4.3
CORPORATE SIGNATURE
COLOUR VARIANTS
MPA MARKETING COMMUNICATIONS GUIDEProper application of the corporate colours enhances 
the image of MPA.
The colours blue, green and black are the full colours 
of the corporate signature and should be used for all
important applications, eg. corporate stationery and signage. The full colour version of the signature 
should be used on white background whenever
possible. However, when only one colour is permitted 
due to printing limitations or cost considerations,the signature can be applied in one colour.
In instances where the corporate signature must
be applied on a dark background, it may be reversed 
out in white. Whenever possible, the background should be one of the corporate colours to maintain
consistency.
For special colour application utilising foils, either 
gold or silver can be used to complement the 
background or application.
For further information, please refer to the Corporate Identity 
Standards Manual.Full Colour
Single Colour
Reversed White

